The Paris Agreement, a historic agreement reached in
Paris in December 2015, has been a game-changer
in international discussions on climate change. Nearly
all major greenhouse-gas emitting countries have now
ratified the Paris Agreement, together accounting for
around 90% of global emissions. Its aim is to keep
global warming well below 2°C and pursue “efforts to
limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C,” and deals with
emission reductions, adaptation to impacts, and means
to pay for these efforts. This temperature goal represents a significant
strengthening of ambition from previous international discussions, which had focused on a
temperature goal of only below 2°C.
Given the lack of scientific knowledge around this ambitious new temperature goal at the time, the IPCC was
formally invited to produce a Special Report on Global
Warming of 1.5°C. Taking two
years to produce and written by
74 scientists from 40 countries,
the report was finalised and adopted by all IPCC member governments in Korea in October 2018.


By 2050, between 665,000 and 1.7 million people in the Pacific are expected to be
forced to migrate due to rising sea levels, including the entire populations of islands such as Fiji, the
Marshall Islands, and Tuvalu. 44, 45, 46 In larger countries, such as Bangladesh and the Netherlands, a
very large proportion of the population will probably be forced to relocate (46% and over 70%,
respectively). 47 By 2100, in the U.S. alone, barring a concerted mitigation effort, $238 billion to $507
billion worth of coastal property will likely be below sea level. 48 Some U.S. cities, including Miami,
Florida and Norfolk, Virginia, are in particular danger of inundation and increased flooding.


We would also like to thank Abdalah Mokssit, Secretary of the IPCC, and the staff of the
IPCC Secretariat: Kerstin Stendahl, Jonathan Lynn, Sophie Schlingemann, Judith Ewa, Mxolisi
Shongwe, Jesbin Baidya, Werani Zabula, Nina Peeva, Joelle Fernandez, Annie Courtin, Laura
Biagioni and Oksana Ekzarho. Thanks are due to Elhousseine Gouaini who served as the SPM
conference officer for the 48th Session of the IPCC.
