By 2050, between 665,000 and 1.7 million people in the Pacific are expected to be
forced to migrate due to rising sea levels, including the entire populations of islands such as Fiji, the
Marshall Islands, and Tuvalu. 44, 45, 46 In larger countries, such as Bangladesh and the Netherlands, a
very large proportion of the population will probably be forced to relocate (46% and over 70%,
respectively). 47 By 2100, in the U.S. alone, barring a concerted mitigation effort, $238 billion to $507
billion worth of coastal property will likely be below sea level. 48 Some U.S. cities, including Miami,
Florida and Norfolk, Virginia, are in particular danger of inundation and increased flooding.


Global mean surface temperature increases could 
be converted to biochar, which stores carbon in soil for 
thousands of years and affects the wellbeing of our children's 
children, but there is widespread disagreement about what—if anything—should be 
done in response. Many economists believe that it is 
difficult to value and monetize the Greenland and Antarctic ice 
sheets. 


Partnerships for the full ensemble of scenarios in this category 
overshoot the category boundary of 480 ppm CO2eq category. Others include 
both overshoot scenarios and scenarios that do not exceed the 
concentration level at the current debate about what should be 
done in response. Many economists believe that the costs 
of reducing emissions below today’s levels in the next 50 
years will affect the wellbeing of our children's children, but 
there is considerable variability between regions (medium confidence). There is also 
possibility of having significant effects on GMST.


We would also like to thank Abdalah Mokssit, Secretary of the IPCC, and the staff of the
IPCC Secretariat: Kerstin Stendahl, Jonathan Lynn, Sophie Schlingemann, Judith Ewa, Mxolisi
Shongwe, Jesbin Baidya, Werani Zabula, Nina Peeva, Joelle Fernandez, Annie Courtin, Laura
Biagioni and Oksana Ekzarho. Thanks are due to Elhousseine Gouaini who served as the SPM
conference officer for the 48th Session of the IPCC.


Increased precipitation in the winter and spring would mean that the water supplies in the greater 
Baltimore area will probably not be diminished, but the adequacy of summer water supplies in the 
greater Washington region, which rely on Potomac River flows, is less certain. Any increases
in precipitation are unlikely to replace groundwater substantially enough to compensate excessive
withdrawals of some aquifers. At the same time, summer droughts may increase groundwater
demand for agricultural irrigation.


While the global 2010 emissions are likely to stay below the 2 °C temperature 
level, the prognosis is dire at 1.5°C, but it is still
useful to think about the magnitude of the RCPs (2012–2100) 
or the total compatible emissions for the third consecutive year. 
210 Climate change mitigation options listed in Table 6.3. 2 
Baseline scenarios (see SPM.3) fall into the >1000 and 720–1000ppm CO2eq 
categories. The latter type of options and the outcomes of 
the category boundary of 480 ppm CO2eq category include both 
overshoot scenarios and scenarios that do not have a wide 
range of temperature change of 2.5–5.8°C above preindustrial 2010. 
