

edited by Donald f. boesch
designed and produced by jane M. hawkey



Climate variability & change
Major changes documented
Warming is unequivocal


The process
Observations
Projections
Emission scenarios
Confidence
Abrupt climate change


The context
Temperature
Heat waves
Chesapeake Bay temperatures
Precipitation
Soil moisture
Growing season
Drought and floods


Freshwater supply
Flood hazards
Water quality & aquatic biota


Some basic considerations
Agriculture
Forests


Global sea-level rise
Future sea-level rise
Coastal wetlands
Erosion & inundation
Stormy weather ahead?

Nutrient pollution
Estuarine sediments
Living resources
Ocean acidification


Heat waves
Air quality
Pathogenic diseases


Mitigation
Adaptation



This is an assessment of
the likely consequences
of
the
changing
global climate for Maryland’s
agricultural industry, forestry
resources, fisheries resources,
freshwater supply, aquatic and
terrestrial ecosystems, and human
health. It was undertaken by the Scientific and
Technical Working Group of the Maryland
Commission on Climate Change as part of the
Commission’s charge to develop a Plan of Action
to address the drivers and causes of climate
change and prepare for its likely consequences in
Maryland.
The Assessment was based on extensive literature
review and model projections. In addition to the
scientific literature, other international, national,
and regional assessments of the impacts of
climate change were consulted. The results from
supercomputer models of the responses of climate
to increased greenhouse gas concentrations were
used to project future conditions for Maryland.
These were the same models and scenario
assumptions that were used in the acclaimed

assessment completed in 2007 by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). Model projections were based on averages
for multiple climate models, and selected based on
how well they replicated both global conditions
and those observed in Maryland during the 20th
century. Mean projections for 17 selected models
produced more reliable results than individual
models. Changes in temperature and precipitation
were projected through the 21st century.
In order to estimate the degree of climate change
in Maryland that could be avoided by actions to
reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, two emissions
scenarios were employed. The higher emissions
scenario assumes continued growth in global
emissions throughout the century, while the lower
emissions scenario assumes slower growth, a peak
at mid-century, and thereafter, a decline to about
40% of present levels by the end of the century.

Maryland’s climate warmed after the peak of the
last Ice Age 20,000 years ago, but has been relatively global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
stable for the past 6,000 years. Around these longterm average conditions, there have, of course,
been variations in temperature and precipitation
due to ocean current cycles and solar and volcanic
activity. However, atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases—gases, such as carbon dioxide,
methane, and nitrous oxide, that trap the sun’s energy
from radiating back into space—have dramatically
increased since pre-industrial times. Carbon dioxide
concentrations exceed those experienced over at
least the last 650,000 year.
Largely as a result of this increase in greenhouse
gases, average global temperature and sea level began
to increase rapidly during the 20th century. In its
2007 report, the IPCC concluded that the evidence
for the warming of the Earth is “unequivocal.” The
IPCC also concluded that most of the observed
temperature increase since the middle of the 20th
century is very likely due to the observed increase
in greenhouse gases.
In evaluating the changes in Maryland’s climate
that we are likely to experience over the 21st century,
it should be remembered that climatic regimes
will continue to vary across the state. Western
Maryland has cooler winters and summers and
less precipitation during the winter than the rest
of the state. Changes that occur will overlay these
regional differences, perhaps with some greater
warming during the summer to the west than on the
Eastern Shore. Temperature is projected to increase
substantially, especially under higher emissions.
The increase in average summer temperatures in
terms of degrees of warming is greater than that in
winter. Annual average temperature is projected to
increase by about 3°F by mid-century and is likely
unavoidable. The amount of warming later in the
century is dependent on the degree of mitigation
of greenhouse gas emissions, with summer

temperatures projected to increase by as much
9°F and heat waves extending throughout most
summers if greenhouse gas emissions continue to
grow unchecked.
Precipitation is projected to increase during the
winter, but become more episodic, with more falling
in extreme events. Projections of precipitation are
much less certain than for temperature, but the
mean projections indicated modest increases of
about 10% or so are likely in the winter and spring.
Because of more intermittent rainfall and increased
evaporation with warmer temperatures, droughts
lasting several weeks are more likely to occur during
the summer.



Increased precipitation in the
winter and spring would mean
that the water supplies in the
greater Baltimore area will
probably not be diminished,
but the adequacy of summer
water supplies in the greater
Washington region, which rely on
Potomac River flows, is less certain. Any increases
in precipitation are unlikely to replace groundwater
substantially enough to compensate excessive
withdrawals of some aquifers. At the same time,
summer droughts may increase groundwater
demand for agricultural irrigation.
More intense rainfall resulting from the combined
effects of global climate change and localized
factors, for example, the influence of the urban
canopy on rainfall, is likely to increase peak flooding
in urban environments. Continued increase in
impervious surfaces attendant with development
would exacerbate this problem. Aquatic ecosystems
will likely be degraded by more flashy runoff and
increased temperatures. Intensified rainfall events
and warmer surfaces (roads, roofs, etc.) would
result in rapid increases in stream temperatures,
limiting habitat suitability for native fishes and other
organisms. Higher peak flows and degraded streams
would also transmit more nutrients and sediments
to the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal tributaries,
contributing to water quality impairment in the
estuaries.

Crop production may increase
initially, but then decline later
in the century if emissions
are not reduced. The longer
growing season and higher
carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere are likely to increase
crop production modestly during
the first half of the century. Later in the century,
crop production is likely to be reduced due to
heat stress and summer drought under the higher
emissions scenario. Milk and poultry production
would be also reduced by heat stress. These changes
will require adaptation by Maryland’s agricultural
industry, including changes in crop or animal
varieties, increased irrigation, and air conditioning
for some livestock.
The maple-beech-birch forest of Western
Maryland is likely to fade away and pine trees to
become more dominant in Maryland’s forests.
Forest productivity in terms of timber produced is
likely to decline late in the century under the higher
emissions scenario as a result of heat stress, drought,
and climate-related disturbances such as fires and
storms. The biodiversity of plants and animals
associated with Maryland’s forests is likely to decline.
Habitat alterations resulting from climate change
may force out 34 or more bird species, including the
emblamatic Baltimore oriole, although southern
species may replace them.

Projections that include accelerating the
melting of ice would increase the relative sea-level
along Maryland’s shorelines by more than 1 foot by
mid-century and 3 feet by late century if greenhouse
gas emissions continue to grow. If sea level rises by 3
feet, most tidal wetlands would be lost—about 200
square miles of land would be inundated. New tidal
wetlands developed on newly flooded land would
not offset the loss of existing wetlands and significant
negative effects on living resources dependent on
these wetlands would result. Moreover, if sea level
were to rise by 3 or more feet, this would mean
that rapid and probably uncontrollable melting
of land-based ice was underway and that sea level
would rise at an even greater rate during subsequent
centuries.
Rains and winds from hurricanes are likely to
increase, but changes in their frequency cannot
now be predicted. The destructive potential
of Atlantic tropical storms and hurricanes has
increased since 1970 in association with warming
sea surface temperatures. This trend is likely to
continue as ocean waters warm. Whether Maryland
will be confronted with more frequent or powerful
storms depends on storm tracks that cannot yet be
predicted. However, there is a greater likelihood that
storms striking Maryland would be more powerful
than those experienced during the 20th century and
would be accompanied by higher storm surges—
made worse because of higher mean sea level—and
greater rainfall amounts.


Sea level in Maryland rose by 1
foot in the 20th century, partially
because the land is sinking as a
result of slow adjustments of
the Earth after the last Ice Age.
Maryland coastal regions have
been subsiding at about a rate of 6
inches per century and should continue
at this rate during this century. Additionally, the
average level of the sea in this region rose by about
the same amount (6 inches) during the past century,
resulting in the observed 1 foot of rise of the mean
tidal level relative to the land. As a result, Maryland
has experienced considerable shoreline erosion and
deterioration of coastal wetlands which are a critical
component of its bays and estuaries.
Sea-level rise is very likely to accelerate,
inundating hundreds of square miles of wetlands

Chesapeake and Coastal Bays
restoration goals will likely be
more difficult to achieve as
the climate in Maryland and
the Chesapeake watershed
changes. Increased winterspring runoff would wash more
nutrients into the bays, and higher
temperatures and stronger density stratification in
the estuaries would tend to exacerbate water quality
impairment, the alleviation of which is the prime
restoration objective. Consequently, nutrient loads
would have to be reduced beyond current targets to
achieve water quality requirements. Very significant
changes are also likely to occur that affect sediment
delivery and sedimentation in the estuaries, but are
difficult to quantitatively predict. These include
potential increases in sediment loads from rivers

global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
as a result of increased runoff and more erosive
extreme discharge events, including those caused by
hurricanes, and from shoreline and wetland erosion
as a result of accelerated sea-level rise.
Living resources will very likely change in
species composition and abundance with warming.
A mixture of northern, cool water species and
southern, warm water species currently resides in
the Chesapeake Bay. Northern species such as soft
shell clams and eelgrass are likely to be eliminated
later in the century, almost certainly if greenhouse
gas emissions are not mitigated. Southern species
are very likely to increase in abundance because
the milder winters would allow or enhance
overwintering populations.
As ocean water becomes more acidic, shellfish
production could be affected. Increased atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere
have already lowered pH in the world’s oceans, a
trend that is very likely to continue. Recent research
indicates that the rate at which oysters and other
coastal shellfish build their calcium carbonate shells
will likely be affected, but whether this would occur
in Maryland waters has not been evaluated.

Health risks due to heat stress
are very likely to increase, if
emissions are not reduced.
Under the higher emissions
scenario, heat waves are
projected to greatly increase
risks of illness and death before
the end of the century, with an
average of 24 days per summer exceeding 100°F. The
poor, the elderly, and urban populations are most
susceptible. Some, but not all, of these increased
risks can be reduced by air conditioning and other
adaptation measures.
Respiratory illnesses are likely to increase, unless
air pollution is greatly reduced. More ground-level
ozone, responsible for multiple respiratory illnesses,
is formed under prolonged, high temperatures.
Releases of air pollutants (nitrogen oxides and
volatile organic compounds) that cause ozone to be
formed have been declining, but would have to be
reduced much more in a warmer climate to avoid
a reversal in progress toward achieving air quality
standards.
Increased risks of pathogenic diseases may be less
likely. The mortality due to vector-borne and nonvector borne diseases in the United States is low

because of public health precautions and treatment,
which would likely adapt to changes in disease
risks. Climate change might affect the exposure of
Marylanders to pathogens such as the West Nile
virus, but precautions and treatment could manage
this greater risk.

The reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions has substantial
benefits for Maryland. The
mitigation of global emissions
by mid-century would very
likely result in significantly
lower sea-level rise, reduced
public health risks, fewer extreme
weather events, and less decline in agricultural
and forest productivity and loss of biodiversity and
species important to the Chesapeake Bay. More
serious impacts beyond this century, such as sealevel rise of 10 feet or more, would be avoided.
Based on the projections made in this report,
adaptation strategies for human health, water
resources, and restoration of Maryland’s bays should
be evaluated and, where necessary, implemented.
Adaptation measures to reduce coastal vulnerability
should plan for a 1 foot rise in sea level by midcentury and a rise of at least 2 feet by late in the
century. Depending on the course of greenhouse gas
emissions, observations, and modeling, planning
for increases in sea level of up to 4 feet by the end
of the century may be required. The Commission
on Climate Change should evaluate additional
adaptation strategies related to human health, water
resources, forest management, and restoration of the
Chesapeake Bay and Maryland’s Coastal Bays. The
projections of impacts provided in this assessment
provide a frame of reference for these evaluations.
Maryland should marshal and enhance its
capacity for monitoring and assessment of climate
impacts, as a more extensive, sustained, and
coordinated system for monitoring the changing
climate and its impacts is required. Because of its
national laboratories, strong university programs,
knowledge-based economy, and proximity to the
nation’s capital, Maryland is in a strong position
to become a national and international leader
in regional-to-global climate change analysis
and its application to innovative mitigation and
adaptation.



Recognizing the scientific consensus
about climate change, the contribution
of human activities, and the vulnerability
of Maryland’s people, property, natural resources
and public investments, Governor Martin O’Malley
issued an Executive Order on April 20, 2007, that
established Maryland’s Commission on Climate
Change in order to address the need to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and prepare the State
for likely consequences of climate change. The
Commission was given the task of developing a
Plan of Action to address the drivers and causes of
climate change, prepare for the likely consequences
and impacts of climate change to Maryland, and
establish firm benchmarks and timetable for
implementing the Plan.
This report constitutes the climate change impact
assessment and thus a key part of the Commission’s
Action Plan. It was prepared by a Scientific and

Governor Martin O’Malley signs the Executive Order creating
the Maryland Commission on Climate Change, joined by Cabinet
members and General Assembly leaders.

Technical Working Group comprised of Marylandbased scientists, engineers and other experts, who
worked over ten months to produce this report.
Specifically, the Working Group was charged to
investigate climate change dynamics, including
current and future climate models and forecasts
and evaluate the likely consequences of climate
change to Maryland’s agricultural industry, forestry
resources, fisheries resources, freshwater supply,
aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, and human
health. In addition, the Working Group was called

global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
assuming global action to reduce these emissions.
The second scenario helps to identify the changes
that may be inevitable and for which Maryland
must be prepared to adapt. In this manner, it seeks
to provide a basis for the development of prudent
and effective public policy by the Governor and
General Assembly.
Secondly, this Assessment is presented so as to
be accessible and comprehensible to the citizens of
Maryland as they develop their understanding of
this unprecedented challenge to humankind and
make personal choices and decisions regarding
policy options at local, state, and national levels.
Finally, this Assessment is just the first installment
of what must be continuous reassessment of
Maryland’s changing climate, the impacts of this
change, and what science and engineering can do to
understand, predict, and manage these impacts.

on to advise the Commission and its other working
groups as their work proceeded. In particular, the
Scientific and Technical Working Group provided
information and analysis for the development of
the goals for reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and for adaptation strategies for reducing coastal
vulnerability.
This Comprehensive Assessment of Climate
Change Impacts in Maryland is intended to serve a
number of purposes. First, it is one of the three legs
of the stool for the Commission’s Plan of Action,
providing regional context for the importance of
reducing Maryland’s greenhouse gas emissions
and projections of future climate change for which
we should be prepared to adapt. For this reason,
projections for climate change and its impacts
present two scenarios, one assuming continued
growth in greenhouse gas emissions and the other


Maryland’s climate has been variable but stable for several thousand years.

Maryland’s climate warmed after the peak of the last Ice Age and has been relatively stable for the past 6,000 years.
Around these long-term average conditions there have, of course, been variations in temperature and precipitation
due to ocean current cycles, solar activity, and volcanic activity.

Atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases have dramatically increased.

Certain gases that trap the sun’s energy from radiating back into space have increased since pre-industrial times.
Carbon dioxide concentrations exceed those experienced over at least the last 650,000 years. Average global
temperature and sea level began to increase rapidly during the 20th century.

Global warming is unequivocal.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change found the evidence for the warming of the Earth to be
“unequivocal.” The IPCC concluded that most of the observed temperature increase since the middle of the 20th
century is very likely due to the observed increase in greenhouse gases.



aryland’s climate has changed over
millennia as the major planetary forces
affecting the Earth’s climate caused
glaciers to spread and recede. However, after the
peak of the last Ice Age about 20,000 years ago, the
climate warmed, most of the glaciers melted, and
sea level rose, reaching approximately the present
conditions about 6,000 or more years ago. The slow,
continued rise in local water levels was mainly the
result of the slow sinking of the Earth’s crust beneath
us—this itself is a delayed effect of melting glaciers.
The first Native Americans came to Maryland as its
climate was becoming more moderate and habitable.
For most of the time they have been here and all of
the time of occupancy by Europeans, Africans and
other subsequent migrants, our climate has been
relatively stable. Our society, economy, and quality
of life has developed under and adapted to this
climatic regime.
Of course, our weather (see Section 4 for a
discussion of the differences between weather and
climate) still varies from year to year—some years
are warmer or wetter than others—and even over
cycles that extend over several years to a decade or
more. This variability is caused by shifts in largescale processes in the ocean and atmosphere such as
the El Niño cycles in the Pacific Ocean, variations in

solar activity, and even volcanic eruptions halfway
around the world. But, over the past few thousand
years, this has caused climate to fluctuate around a
rather consistent average.
During the 20th century, however, scientists have
concluded that the Earth’s climate was warming
and is very likely to warm much more dramatically
as a result of human activities that have increased
the amount of certain gases in the atmosphere.
These gases, most notably carbon dioxide, but also
methane and nitrous oxide, trap some of the sun’s
energy radiating back out into space, much as the
glass panes of a garden greenhouse. The presence
of these gases warms the atmosphere sufficiently
for life to flourish—without these greenhouse gases
the average surface temperature of Earth would be
0°F rather than 57°F.1 But, as these heat-trapping
gases continue to increase the temperature of
Earth’s atmosphere and oceans will also continue to
increase—this is what is meant by global warming.

Major Changes Documented
There is no doubt that greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere have been increasing. Since preindustrial times (1750) carbon dioxide concentration
has increased by 38 percent, methane by nearly

global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
(measured at Mauna Loa, Hawaii)


Concentrations of Greenhouse Gases
from Year 0 to 2005



annual cycle

carbon dioxide (CO2)
nitrous oxide (N2O)
methane (CH4)



CO2 (ppm), N2O (ppb)

Carbon Dioxide Concentration (ppmV)



The global mean surface temperature, based on
both air and ocean temperatures, has increased by
more than 1°F (0.6°C) since 1930 (Figure 2.2), with
most of this due to a steady and rapid increase since
1980. Twelve of the last thirteen years rank among
the warmest years since 1850, when thermometer
measurements became widely recorded. In the
Northern Hemisphere, where there are numerous
data on temperature proxies such as tree ring
thickness and ratios of stable isotopes, neither the
recent high global mean temperature nor the rapid
rate of temperature increase have been experienced
during the last 2000 years.2
Global warming affects not only air and ocean
temperatures but also precipitation and sea level—
ocean waters expand as they warm and as melting
glaciers and polar ice sheets further contribute
to the ocean’s volume. Warmer conditions cause



170 percent, and nitrous oxide by 17 percent.2
The increase in carbon dioxide has been caused
primarily by burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and
natural gas) and the clearing of forests which held
reservoirs of carbon in wood and soils and removed
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere through
photosynthesis. The increase in the other two major
greenhouse gases is mostly due to agricultural
activities: methane through growing rice and raising
cattle, and nitrous oxide from the application of
industrial fertilizers to crops, as well as a result of
the high-temperature combustion of fossil fuels.
Carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere
has increased from a pre-industrial value of about
280 parts per million (ppm) to 384 ppm by 2007
(Figure 2.1), exceeding by far the natural range
over at least the last 650,000 years as determined
from analyses of air bubbles trapped in glacial ice.

Concentrations of carbon dioxide measured at Mauna Loa, Hawaii have shown a continuous increase since measurements began
in 1958. Annual fluctuations represent seasonal biological cycles of photosynthesis and respiration. (B) Concentrations of the greenhouse
gases carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide dramatically increased during the 20th century, exceeding by far concentrations that
occurred over the last 2,000 years.



U.K. Meteorological Office sea surface temperature
Japan Meteorological Agency sea surface temperature
U.S. National Climate Data Center


Figure 2.2. Global mean temperature has increased approximately
1.4°F (0.8°C) during the 20th century as reflected in three separate
meteorological databases.

AIRS, a new spaceborne instrument, is designed specifically to
measure the amounts of water vapor and greenhouse gases.

more moisture to go into the atmosphere through
evaporation and plant transpiration, and this water
vapor must come down in the form of precipitation.
However, the effect is not uniform, with increased
precipitation documented over the middle and high
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere and over
tropical land areas, while precipitation declined in
the already dry, lower latitude lands.


The conclusion that the warming of the climate
system is unequivocal and the preceding observations
come from the most recent assessment of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an
international scientific body established by the World
Meteorological Organization
Global warming is
and by the United Nations
unequivocal and could Environment Programme.
cause irreversible
The IPCC was awarded, along
damage to the planet with Vice-President Al Gore,
the Nobel Peace Prize for its
Fourth Assessment Report3, released in 2007. The
findings of the Panel are careful and deliberate and
enjoy the wide acceptance of the climate science
community—in fact, scientific criticism that
the IPCC was too cautious and reticent4 is more
common than criticism for overstating the case.
The IPCC concluded that most of the observed

increase in globally averaged temperatures since the
middle of the 20th century is very likely due to the
observed increase in greenhouse gas concentrations
resulting from human activities. The Panel also
found decreases in snow cover and sea ice extent
and the retreat of mountain glaciers during this
period. Global average sea level rose with increasing
ocean water temperatures. Heavy rains increased in
frequency in some regions of the world.
Extensive physical and ecological changes
resulting from the changing climate are also
described in the IPCC assessment, including
thawing of permafrost, lengthening of the growing
season in middle and high latitudes, shifts in the
ranges of animals and plants toward the poles and
up mountain elevation gradients, declines in some
plant and animal species, and earlier seasonal
flowering of trees, emergence of insects, and egglaying in birds.5
The same detailed appraisal of the relationship of
the changes in Maryland’s climate and the increase
in greenhouse gas concentrations has not been
undertaken, and indeed is not practical because of
the global scale of the climate system. However, the
trends of increased temperature, precipitation, and
sea level rise and many of the biological changes
that have been observed are very consistent with the
assessment of the IPCC for North America.2,5




global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

The lakes, ponds, and streams of Maryland are a favorite habitat for the twelve-spotted dragonfly.

approach to assessing recent & future climate change • 11

approach to assessing recent & future climate change

The Assessment was based on extensive literature and model projections.

In addition to the scientific literature, other international, national and regional assessments of the impacts of
climate change were consulted. The results from supercomputer models of the responses of climate to increased
greenhouse gas concentrations were used to project future conditions in Maryland.

Model projections were based on averages for multiple climate models.

Models were selected based on how well they replicated both global conditions and those observed in Maryland
during the 20th century. Mean projections for 17 models produced more reliable results than individual models.
Changes in temperature and precipitation were projected through the 21st century.

Higher and lower emissions scenarios were employed.

In order to estimate the degree of climate change in Maryland that could be avoided by actions to reduce emissions
or greenhouse gases, two emissions scenarios were employed. The higher emissions scenario assumes continued
growth in emissions throughout the century, while the lower emissions scenario assumes a slower growth peak at
mid-century and declines thereafter to about 40% of present emissions levels by the end of the century.


The Scientific and Technical Working
Group (STWG) developed this assessment
using published scientific information on
Maryland’s climate and environments, the recent
IPCC reports, even more recent scientific literature,
and several new assessments of specific issues or
region impacts. Particularly important among these
assessments were various Synthesis and Assessment
Products being produced by the U.S. Climate Change
Science Program (some drafts still in preparation or
review)6 and regional assessments, especially the
Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA).
The NECIA, led by the Union of Concerned
Scientists, produced two very readable reports7 on
climate change, its impacts and solutions in the
northeastern United States, defined as the ninestate region including Pennsylvania and New Jersey
northward. Because of its proximity, the findings
of the NECIA are highly relevant and have been
reflected in the Maryland assessment.
The STWG did not have the time or resources to
collect or analyze extensive data or to develop new
models of Maryland’s climate, relying instead on the
primary or summary literature as described above.
It did, however, use the results of the extensive
general circulation models that were run on a global

scale for the IPCC assessment. Such models are run
on supercomputers using common assumptions
about future emissions of greenhouse gases and
have become increasingly skillful in reproducing
the climatic conditions experienced during the
20th century looking backward in hindcast mode.
This gives some level of confidence in their ability
to project conditions with future increases in
greenhouse gases for at least the near future. The
models were used by the IPCC in demonstrating
that the warming observed over the past 100 years is
unlikely to be due to natural causes, such as the sun
and volcanoes, alone. Model results that take into
account greenhouse gas emissions and the cooling
effects of sulfate aerosols, also emitted by burning
fossil fuels, are able to reproduce the observed 20th
century warming, while those that only account for
the natural climate forces do not (Figure 3.1).
While our understanding of the forces that
affect the Earth’s climate will improve, the scientific
community believes that the current generation of
models produces reasonable projections of future
climatic conditions. They cannot, of course, predict
the weather on a specific place or day, but can
represent best estimates of future climatic conditions
within a broad region averaged over a decade.


global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland


Climate models run with just natural forces due to
solar activity and volcanoes (blue band) suggest slight declines
in global mean temperature during the latter 20th century, while
the same models including greenhouse gases and aerosol sulfates
from human activities (pink band) show warming very consistent
with what was actually observed (solid black line).


The focus of this assessment is the impacts of future
climate change, rather than how much of past
climate variability is due to human effects, so the
emphasis is on model projections. However, data
from stations from the United States Historical
Climate Network, corrected for the warming effects
of urbanization and the local effects of topography,
were used to determine how well models reproduce
recent climate in Maryland. These individual
weather station records also yield information on
the trends in temperature and precipitation that
have been experienced.
Beyond
temperature
and
precipitation,
sufficiently long records of other climate-sensitive
variables are scarce, thus attribution of past changes
to climate is difficult. One example of the value of
such secondary indicators is the recorded trend
toward earlier start of honey production in the
Piedmont region.8 Honey production requires both
temperatures high enough to maintain larval bees
and an ample source of nectar from flowering trees,
thus integrating two measures of climate change.
Other examples of observed changes in forestry and
agriculture, Chesapeake Bay processes, sea level,
and hydrology are highlighted later in the report.

Projections
In forecasting the storm tracks of active or developing
hurricanes, for example, an ensemble of models is
used rather than just relying on one. This allows
for a ‘best estimate’ prediction within a range of

plausible tracks. A similar approach was used in the
IPCC Fourth Assessment by employing a group of
satisfactorily performing general circulation models
all run with the same assumptions for greenhouse
gas emissions. The archived files of output from
these supercomputer model runs were accessed for
this assessment.9 The average of the model outputs
yields a better representation of present climate than
any single model10 or the small number of models
used in the Northeast Assessment.7 This ensemble
mean gives the best projections because some model
inaccuracies are unrelated to the shortcomings of
other models, so they cancel out on average.
This assessment used a similar strategy, beginning
with the 24 models used for the IPCC Fourth
Assessment model intercomparison. The 17 best
performing models were selected based on how well
the models reproduce the climate in Maryland over
the past century.11 Net error
scores were computed for
Projections of the
temperature and precipitation
based on means, trends over 17 best performing
the century, seasonal and models were averaged
ten-year filtered correlations,
the standard deviation, and the skill with which
the models represent global climate. The subset of
better performing models was then averaged over
the state of Maryland to estimate changes in future
climate in this region.
Because the global models require so many hours
of supercomputer time to run, they cannot represent
regions as small as Maryland with more than a few
grid points (Figure 3.2). Thus, the projected changes
over the state need to be considered in the context
of the large differences in local state climate. For
example, one would expect the climate in high
elevation regions of western Maryland to remain
cooler than the climate on the coastal plain despite
similar temperature increases in both regions (see
Table 4.1 in the next chapter). The average seasonal
cycle for 1979-1999 is removed from each model
output prior to determining future changes. This
reduces the effect of individual model biases on the
projection of future changes and projects future
climate relative to the average conditions around
1990.



Longitude

although the lower emissions scenario was not
developed with that specific assumption in mind.
However, the scenarios should not be seen as either
a floor or ceiling of possible outcomes. Recent
growth in carbon dioxide emissions exceed the
higher emissions scenario.12 On the other hand, the
emission reduction goals being actively discussed
internationally, i.e. reductions of 60-80% by 2050,
would, if implemented, reduce emissions more and
result in less warming than the lower emissions
scenario. Although the IPCC intends to use several
specific emissions mitigation scenarios in its next
assessment, projections do not yet exist for such
scenarios.
While carbon dioxide emissions for the two
scenarios begin to diverge significantly around
2025 and decline in the low emissions scenario after
2050 (Figure 3.3), the cumulative emissions begin to
diverge only after 2040. Because carbon dioxide is
retained in the atmosphere for a long time, the full
effects of this divergence are not fully manifest until
late in the century. Thus, in the model projections,

Surface air temperature for one of the climate models,
showing the number of grid cells covering Maryland, and also the
averaging regions employed for this assessment.
Metric Tons of Carbon
(billions)

A critical objective of this assessment was to
compare future climate impacts under the situation
in which greenhouse gas emissions continue to grow
throughout the 21st century with the situation that
might be realized if global action was taken to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. A similar approach was
used in the Northeast Assessment. Two plausible
global emissions scenarios were selected from
among those used by the IPCC assessments.
The higher emissions (A2) scenario assumes a
heterogeneous world, with locally self-reliant
response to climate change, regional technological
and economic development, and faster growing
population. The even higher emission, A1Fi,
scenario used in the Northeast Assessment was
not used because of the limited archived output
available for this scenario. The lower emissions
(B1) scenario assumes slower population growth,
clean technologies are developed and implemented
globally, and there is a general emphasis on global
solutions to economic and environmental issues.
These scenarios can be viewed representing
the ‘business as usual’ response to climate change
versus sustained emissions reduction strategy,

30

higher emissions scenario
lower emissions scenario

25
20
15
10
5
0
1980

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Year
Cumulative Carbon Dioxide Emissions
2000

Metric Tons of Carbon
(billions)

Emission Scenarios

Carbon Dioxide Emissions
35

higher emissions scenario
lower emissions scenario

1600
1200
800
400
0
1980

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Year
Figure 3.3. Top: Carbon dioxide annual emissions for the low
and high emissions trajectories. Bottom: Total carbon dioxide
emissions summed from 1990 to 2100.

14  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
Terms Used to Express Judgement of Likelihood
very
unlikely

0%

unlikely

about as likely
as not

likely

50%

very
likely

100%

Wikipedia Commons

Figure 3.4. Terms used in this assessment to communicate
judgment of likelihood.

Smog hangs over a Baltimore highway clogged with traffic.

there is often little difference between the higher
and lower emissions scenarios until after 2050 and
the differences increase thereafter.

Confidence
The spread in model predictions is one indication
of how well the underlying physics and feedbacks of
climate processes are represented. The hydrological
cycle, for example, is less well represented than
temperature in all of the climate models because
coarse spatial resolution of models precludes a good
representation of the physics involved in evaporating,
transporting, and precipitating water. As a result,
we have high confidence in temperature projections
for which the physical processes represented in the
model are better understood, moderate confidence
in trends in temperature extremes, moderate
confidence in directional changes in precipitation
and other hydrological variables, and relatively low
confidence in model projections of precipitation
extremes at this scale.
The spread of model projections for a given
parameter is used to assess the likelihood of the
projected outcome. Throughout this report, the
characterization of likelihood of both trends in
observations and certainty of projections has
followed with the IPCC assessments, except
without the discrete probabilities assigned by the
IPCC (Figure 3.4). Similar to the assessment of
weather and climate extremes by the U.S. Climate
Change Science Program13, this approach allows
the communication of the level of certainty that is
consistent throughout the report.

ABRUPT CLIMATE CHANGE
Finally, a word of caution is offered about the use
of climate model projections in planning for future
climate conditions. There is greater confidence
regarding some variables (such as global and
regional temperature) than others (such as regional
precipitation). Some variables (such as soil moisture
or stream flow) result from the complex interplay of
temperature, water, carbon dioxide concentrations,
and living organisms, making them difficult to model
with great reliability. Still others will be influenced
by processes that may dramatically change and thus
are inherently challenging for scientists to predict
(such as the contribution of future polar ice sheet
melting to sea-level rise).
Because of the way they are constructed, climate
models can be used to assess gradual trends
averaged over decades. They are, at this point in their
development, less reliable as a signal of more abrupt
climate changes. Various records of past climate
changes, including deep sea sediments, ice cores, tree
rings, and other natural recorders, indicate that they
have often taken place within a fairly short period of
time, within a century or even a decade. Scientists
are actively conducting research on the causes and
consequences of such abrupt climate changes, but
few attempts have been made to model them under
future global warming conditions. For the purpose
of this assessment, it is simply important to keep in
mind that the changes that will take place during
this century may be more ‘jerky’ than continuous,
with trends reversing for some years and advancing
more dramatically over the period of just a decade.
This places a challenge both for our observations of
trends and for our ability to adapt quickly.

section 4: recent & likely climate changes in maryland • 15

recent & likely climate changes in maryland
 Climatic regimes will continue to vary across Maryland.

Western Maryland has cooler winters and summers and less precipitation during the winter than the rest of the
state. Changes will occur on top of these regional differences, perhaps with some greater warming during the
summer to the west than on the Eastern Shore.

 Temperature is projected to increase substantially, especially under higher emissions.

Average temperature is projected to increase by about 3°F by mid-century and is likely unavoidable. The amount
of warming later in the century is dependent on the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions, with summer
temperatures projected to increase by as much 9°F, and heat waves extending throughout most summers.

 Precipitation is projected to increase during the winter, but become more episodic.

Projections of precipitation are much less certain than for temperature, but modest increases are more likely in
the winter and spring. Because of more intermittent rainfall and increased evaporation with warmer temperatures,
droughts lasting several weeks are projected to be more likely during the summer.

the Context

T

he state of Maryland, although comprising
only 12,303 square miles, spans diverse
geographic and climatic zones, from
the flat Coastal Plain, westward to the Piedmont
foothills, and the Appalachian Plateau. Well-defined
seasons divide the cool, northwesterly winddominated, dormant season for plant growth from
the warm summers with southwesterly winds and
high humidity in the coastal regions. Spring and fall
are highly variable with weather changing almost
daily as warm and cool fronts push through mainly
from the west. Although Maryland lies south of the
main winter cyclone track, the influence of these
storms can affect winter climate. Storms originating
in the south or coastal regions (Nor’easters) also
play a role in destructive winter weather, as they are
accompanied by large amounts of rainfall and high
tides. Hurricanes and tropical storms, although
infrequent with only eight storms affecting Maryland
since 1954, also can have a destructive influence
on Maryland Coastal Plain regions in particular,
primarily through flooding and storm surge.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the seasonal range of
temperature across Maryland. While the higher
elevations to the west remain cooler in both winter
and summer, the rate of temperature increase from
1977 to 1999, is similar across the state, with an

increase in the mean annual temperature of 2°F. No
weather stations show a temperature decrease. This is
significantly more warming than the global average.2
The rainfall differences across the state are much
smaller, with Maryland having little seasonality in
rainfall; consequentially, most agriculture relies
on precipitation rather than irrigation (see Section
6). Precipitation is highly variable from year to
year, and no clear trend emerges from the stations
in Maryland, although significant increases in
precipitation have been documented to the north.

Adrian Jones

Section 4

key points

Winter wheat is sometimes planted in a mix with cool-season
clovers or field peas to suppress weeds and prevent soil erosion.

16  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Valley
Appalachian & Ridge
Blue
Plateau
Ridge

F
L

Piedmont

Coastal Plain

0

50 miles

N

150

40

Coastal Plain
40
30

3

20

WINTER

Precipitation
(inches/month)

50

Piedmont

SUMMER

Appalachian
Plateau
4

100

WINTER

20

10

2

Appalachian
Plateau
frost days

Days

200

Days

60

250
SUMMER

Daily temperature
(° F)

80

Piedmont
growing days

Coastal Plain

0

>90° days

Figure 4.1. Top: The five physiogeographic regions of Maryland.
Middle: Temperatures range seasonally across Maryland, with
the elevated, inland regions to the west remaining cooler in both
winter and summer and experiencing a shorter growing season.
Bottom: The precipitation differences across the state are modest,
except in winter, when it is lower on the Appalachian Plateau. The
average number of days with temperatures greater than 90°F is
much lower in the Appalachian Plateau.13

Temperature
Human-induced climate change is most directly
linked to global temperature rise. However,
atmospheric circulation, interactions of climate
with land surfaces and oceans, and other factors
drive patterns of heating and cooling that affect the

projected temperature increases. On a global scale,
temperature increases are generally expected to be
greater in the Northern Hemisphere, particularly
toward the Arctic regions.2 Maryland, therefore, will
not warm by as many degrees as the New England
states.7 Nonetheless, Maryland will experience
significant warming in the coming decades and
century (Figure 4.2).
The climate model mean projects an additional 2°F
of warming by 2025, regardless of which emissions
scenario is followed. By 2050, the policy decisions
applying to which emissions path is followed
begin to have an effect, and a difference in winter
versus summer warming also emerges. The lower
emissions scenario warms slightly less by 2050, with
summertime temperature increases of nearly 3°F.
Temperature under the higher emissions scenario
begins to increase sharply after mid-century, with
summertime seeing somewhat greater warming
than winter.
By the end of the century, the difference between
the higher and lower emissions scenario is marked.
The low emissions path has held temperature
increase to 4.8°F in summer,
and 4°F in winter, while the Under higher
higher emissions scenario
emissions, summers are
leads to warming of nearly 9°F
in summer and 7°F in winter in projected to be nearly
Maryland. One would expect 9°F hotter by end of
these increases to be above the century
current mean temperatures
for the three regions of the state as shown in Figure
4.1. Summertime average (over both night and day)
temperatures in the Coastal Plain would increase
from 77°F to 86°F by the end of the century under
the higher emissions scenario. However, an ongoing
national assessment has produced statistically
10

Temperature Anomaly (ºF)

Physiographic Regions of Maryland

summer
winter

high
emissions

8
6

low
emissions

4
2
0

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Year
Figure 4.2. Temperature increase (°F) for Maryland from 1990 to
the year 2100. The shaded regions depict the 25th-75th percentile
spread between all the models.

section 4: recent & likely climate changes in maryland • 17

Heat Waves
These projections for summer and winter are based
on temperatures averaged over a three-month
season. However, it is not the average temperature
that affects our comfort or health, but rather the
daily extremes. A 4°F average warming could be
derived from an endless succession of slightly warm
days or from average summer days interspersed
with intense heat waves (operationally defined here
as three or more consecutive days with temperatures
exceeding 90°F). Figure 4.4 depicts increases in the
number of days with maximum daily temperatures
above 90°F and 100°F. In the late 20th century, there
was an average of 30 days per year with maximum
temperatures in excess of 90°F. Of course, this
number would be higher in urban areas, and
lower at higher elevation or near the ocean (see
Figure 4.1). On the average, temperatures reached
100°F on only about two days per year. Recent
trends suggest a moderation in the number of high
maximum temperature days in the Mid-Atlantic
region14, however the monthly average maximum

winter (DJF)
lower
emissions
scenario

summer (JJA)

5
5

4.5

4.5
9

higher
emissions
scenario

7
8

6

Figure 4.3. National maps of downscaled model projections of
mean temperature increases for the period 2080-2099 show
results very similar to this assessment. Note the east to west
trend in the warming during the summer. Courtesy of Katherine
Hayhoe, Texas Tech University.
90˚F Days

120

Days per Year

100

current conditions
lower emissions scenario
higher emissions scenario

urban

80
60
State
40
20
0
late 20th century

35
30

late 21st century

100˚F Days

40

Days per Year

downscaled maps based on the averages of a similar
array of outputs that suggest summertime warming
would be greater in Western Maryland and less on
the lower Eastern Shore because of the moderating
influence of the ocean (Figure 4.3)
These projections have relatively little spread
between model projections for a given scenario, thus
it is very likely that there will be more warming in
summer than winter, and that the higher emissions
scenario will result in substantially greater warming
than the lower emissions scenario. Confidence in
how well models represent the underlying physics
of human caused warming is also high. While the
likelihood of warming is high, the exact magnitude
of the amount of increase is less so. However, none
of the models project less than 4°F of warming in
summer by 2100.
This is not to say that as the century progresses
each year will be warmer than the preceding year.
There will likely be months and even years that are
on average cooler than the current seasonal norms.
This is due to variations in the weather, not changes
in climate. This assessment focuses on the average
temperature over longer periods, and this continues
to increase in all emission scenarios. Thus, any
given warm or cold weather episode cannot be
unambiguously attributed to climate; rather it is the
accumulation of weather over time that gives rise to
changes in climate.

current conditions
lower emissions scenario
higher emissions scenario

urban

25
20
15
State

105
0
late 20th century

late 21st century

Figure 4.4. Number of days with high temperatures reaching or
exceeding 90°F and 100°F in the late 20th century and projected
for the late 21st century under higher and lower emission scenarios.
Extension of the bars show the number days exceeding these
levels in urban settings.

temperature at Maryland weather stations has been
increasing faster than the average temperature,
suggesting that maximum daily temperature will
ultimately follow suit.
The number of days with temperatures exceeding
90°F is projected to double by the end of the
century even under the low emissions scenario
and triple under the higher emissions scenario in
which virtually all summer days would exceed 90°F

18  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Chesapeake Bay Temperatures
Climate models currently do not resolve at the
scale of estuaries, even for an estuary as large as
the Chesapeake Bay (see Figure 3.2). However,
observations of Chesapeake water temperatures
extend back into the 1940s (Figure 4.6). These
observations show a trend of increasing water
temperature of 0.4°F per decade, with much of
that increase over the past 30 years, consistent with
increasing air temperatures. This amounts to a
warming of 2.8°F over much of the Bay since 1940.
A statistical model was used to quantify the
relationship between air temperature, over the
preceding month, and Chesapeake Bay surface
water temperature based on these observations.
Heat Wave Duration, Maryland

Probability of Occurrence

80

20th century model
lower emissions scenario
higher emissions scenario

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0

<20

20-40

40-60

60-80

80-100 100-120 120-140

>140

Longest Annual Heat Wave (days)
Figure 4-5. The chance that any given year will experience a heat
wave of the indicated duration for present day and for the end of
the century under low emissions and high emissions scenarios.

Observed Chesapeake Bay Temperature
64

Temperature (ºF)

during an average summer (Figure 4.4). Under
the higher emissions scenario, the number of days
with temperatures in excess of 100°F is projected to
increase by a factor of five, with most summer days
exceeding this threshold. While at present, heat
waves tend to have a limited duration with only a
13% chance per year of a heat wave lasting longer
than 20 days, extended heat waves are likely to be
much more frequent and longer lasting, especially
under the higher emissions scenario (Figure 4.5). In
the low emissions scenario, it remains most likely
that any heat wave experienced will be of less than 20
days duration; however, the chance of a longer heat
wave increases greatly. Under the higher emissions
scenario, any given year is more likely to have a heat
wave persisting for 140 days or more than it is to not
have a heat wave exceeding 20 days. The predictions
for increasing heat waves and temperature extremes
are likely, with moderate confidence.

61

58

55
1938

1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

Figure 4.6: Bay temperature at Chesapeake Biological Laboratory
at Solomons, MD, annual temperature, and a smoothed line
illustrating the trend through 2006.

This relationship was then applied to project
Bay temperatures as a function of climate-model
projections of air temperature.
Because the Chesapeake Bay is Temperatures in the
shallow in most places, surface
Chesapeake Bay have
water temperature is not
only closely related to the air already warmed by
temperature, but also reflects more than 2°F
temperatures in the shallows
where many benthic organisms such as seagrasses,
oysters, or blue crabs live. The temperature increases
projected by the model average for Chesapeake Bay
closely follow the air temperature increase shown
in Figure 4.2, suggesting increases of 4°F by 2050
in the higher emissions scenario and 2.5°F for the
low emissions path. This additional warming is of a
similar magnitude to that observed in the Bay since
1940 (Figure 4.6). By 2100, the model projections
suggest warming of 9°F and 5°F for the higher and
lower emissions scenarios, respectively.
Another way to express how these temperature
changes might affect the ecology of the future Bay,
including what plants and animals might live there,
is to compare these future conditions with those
currently experienced elsewhere along the Atlantic
coast where current conditions resemble those
projected for the Bay (Figure 4.7). Summertime water
temperatures are likely to be similar to those of the
North Carolina sounds by 2050. Under the higher
emissions scenario, summertime water temperatures
in the Bay might approximate conditions in South
Florida. The effects of temperature increase and
other climate changes on the Chesapeake Bay
ecosystem are discussed further in Section 8.

section 4: recent & likely climate changes in maryland • 19
sea surface
temperature (°F)

40N

90
86

2050
2050

35N

2100

82
78

Precipitation
There has not been a statistically significant trend
in precipitation in Maryland in recent years and
this is consistent with the relatively modest changes
projected by the climate model ensemble mean
(Figure 4.8). Projections of winter rainfall show
the greatest change, with increases of 5% by 2025

74

Precipitation Percent Anomaly
Variability, Maryland

70

30N

higher
emissions
scenario

2100

lower
emissions
scenario

25N
80W

85W

Figure 4.7. Summertime surface water temperatures in the
Chesapeake Bay are projected to approximate those of estuaries
well down the Atlantic Coast by 2050 and 2100.

Precipitation Anomaly (%)

15

higher emissions scenario
lower emissions scenario

winter

10

5
summer

0

-5
2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Year
Figure 4.8. Winter and summer percent change in precipitation.

box 4.1 chesapeake freeze is less frequent
the lower and higher emissions scenarios. This
may have beneficial implications for nearshore
oyster communities (see Section 8).
Change in Frequency of Cold Events
Leading to Chesapeake Bay Ice Formation
40

10 year events
5 year events
annual events

30

Frequency in Years

20

10

0

2007
present
emissions

2100
lower
emissions

2100
higher
emissions

Box Figure 4.1 Time between ice cover events at the end of
the century that occur every 1, 5, and 10 years at present.

Victoria Coles

An ice-covered Chesapeake Bay is an iconic
symbol of winter for many Maryland
residents. Thin ice presently forms in sheltered
embayments in most years. However, at
roughly ten-year intervals, the Bay freezes over
from shore to shore at the Chesapeake Bay
Bridge. While these infrequent ice cover events
may have little effect on the ecology of the
Chesapeake Bay, they represent an obstacle to
shipping, and ice cover reports are routinely
issued for Chesapeake Bay by the U.S. Coast
Guard. The climate model average predicts
that these once every ten year ice cover
events are likely to occur much less frequently
in the future: every 25 years for the year 2100
low emissions scenario and as infrequently
as once every 40 years under the higher
emissions scenario (Box Figure 4.1). Ice cover
that occurs every year at present may become
less common in the future, with ice in the
nearshore environment occurring only every
2-5 years by the end of the century under both

20 • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
When precipitation (P) is compared with the loss
of water due to evaporation and plant transpiration
(ET) that accompany increased temperatures, the
water remaining (P-ET) shows little difference
between the higher and lower emissions scenarios.
However, the mean P-ET difference, reflecting the
water available for runoff
or groundwater recharge, is Precipitation is likely to
projected to decrease by 2 to
increase, but become
7 mm per month during the
summer and increase by 6 more variable
to 7 mm (or only about one
quarter of an inch) per month during the winter by
end of the century; spring and fall projections show
more modest changes.
Perhaps more relevant than the average rainfall,
is how that rainfall is delivered. There is little
change projected for the precipitation in the onequarter of months that are driest. However, the
range of precipitation from 25 to 75 percent of the
time suggests a trend to increasing precipitation in
the wet winter and summer months. The widening

NOAA

projected for both scenarios, a 6.6 to 6.8% increase
by 2050, and increases of 10.4 to 12.6% by 2090
under the lower and higher emissions scenarios
respectively. However, there is a very wide band
of uncertainty around these mean tendencies
and increases of that scale do not approach the
level of present year-to-year variability in winter
precipitation. No season is projected to experience
a substantial decrease in mean precipitation;
however, some models project small declines in
summer or fall precipitation and larger increases
of up to 40% in winter precipitation by the end
of the century. At the same time, large decreases
are projected in winter snow volume (25% less in
2025 to 50% less in 2100 regardless of emission
scenario). While Maryland does not receive large
amounts of snowfall compared with states to the
north7, these reductions are large enough to reduce
the spring river discharge associated with melting
snow. Also, snow accumulation is very likely to be
less common in western Maryland, thus affecting
winter recreational activities.

Summer rain drenches the landscape.

section 4: recent & likely climate changes in maryland • 21
of this range in the projections illustrates that
the month-to-month precipitation variability is
projected to increase.
One measure of this variability is the amount of
rainfall delivered in each rainy day. Climate models
typically underestimate this at present, having too
many days with weak precipitation.15 However,
even with this shortcoming, the mean of model
ensemble projects increases in the amount of rain in
any given day. The models also predict a increase in
the maximum amount of rainfall occurring in any 5day period, with the likelihood of getting more than
5 inches of rainfall in a storm event increasing from
5% at present, to 8% for the lower emissions scenario,
and to 15% for the higher emissions scenario. These
projections, coming as they do from models that
are not able to spatially resolve many aspects of
the hydrological cycle, are only moderately likely;
however, they are broadly consistent with observed
trends.16 More accurate model predictions of
precipitation will require development of regional
climate models with finer spatial resolution.
The Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment
(NECIA) report also projected increases in
precipitation over the region to the immediate
north of Maryland of up to 10% by the end of
the century, with larger increases in winter and
little change in summer. Indices of precipitation
intensity, number of days with precipitation
greater than two inches, and maximum five-day
precipitation all showed comparable trends with the
higher emission scenario used in that assessment
yielding greater effects. The NECIA also found
that increased evapotranspiration and frequency
of short-term droughts were likely, particularly
under higher emissions. This is consistent with this
Maryland assessment. The NECIA projected less
snow accumulation and earlier snowmelt, higher
winter stream flows, and longer summer low-flow
periods than at present, and these trends are also
reproduced here.

Soil Moisture
The effect of changes in temperature and
precipitation and their implications for evaporation
from water or soil and from plants are integrated
in the projections of the changes in soil moisture.
In spite of moderate increases in precipitation,
increases in temperature in the models lead to
decreases in soil moisture throughout the year. This
is consistent with recent studies showing a change in
the trend in North American soil moisture toward
drying over the past 30 years.17
Changes represent 10% more drying in summer
and fall by 2100 for both emissions scenarios in
comparison to present normal summer conditions.
Curiously, there is little difference between the lower
and higher emissions scenarios, despite the much
warmer temperatures projected under the higher
emission scenario. This may be due to the very high
relative humidity likely to occur, which will limit the
rate of evapotranspiration. In years with lower than
average rainfall, soil moisture reductions in spring
and fall may be important to the local ecosystem
and agricultural production. While soil moisture
is dependent on the hydrological cycle and thus
we have moderate confidence in the underlying
physics, there is high agreement among models
that summertime soil moisture will decrease, which
makes this prediction likely.

Growing Season
The length of the growing season is also important
to terrestrial ecosystems in Maryland. The climate
models project decreases in the number of frost
days, where temperatures dip below freezing, and
increases in the length of the frost-free growing
season (Figure 4.9). Increases in growing season
have been observed over the past fifty years.18 While
an increase in growing season may be a boon for
gardeners, the increased active growth time coupled

109

239

Lower Emissions

87

259

Higher Emissions

70

278

Recent Conditions

Number of Days per Year
frost days (coldest temp <32°F)

growing days (days between last and first frost)

Figure 4.9. The number of frost days and growing season length projected before the end of the 21st century under the lower and higher
emissions scenarios compared to recent conditions (end of the 20th century). These represent averages for the state and will vary depending
on regional differences (Figure 4.1).

22  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Drought and Floods
Global climate models do not capture present day
extremes in drought or flood very well. Projections
for droughts are probably more reliable than for flood
conditions, because droughts reflect the influence of
weather patterns that develop over large parts of the
United States during periods of weeks to months.
Floods, on the other hand, are associated with
short-term phenomena and more intense weather
events of a smaller spatial and temporal scale than
resolved in global climate models. Yet, because
these extreme events have such devastating effects
on humans, the economy, and the environment, it
is critical to estimate how the occurrence of flood
events may change in the future to ensure adequate
time for developing response strategies.
The models project an increase in the duration of
annual dry spells, from about 15 days on average at
present, to 17 days for the higher emissions scenario,
and a smaller increase under the lower emissions
scenario. Most of this increase is projected to occur
during the latter part of the century. Based on these
projections, it is likely that summer-fall droughts of
modest duration will increase, especially after the
middle of the century and that under the higher
emissions scenario, there will be longer periods
without rain. This has greater significance for soil
moisture and attendant agricultural drought than
for water supply. However, it is not the average that
affects agricultural drought, but rather the more
extreme or unusual events. The models suggest that,
at present, a month-long drought can be expected
to occur every 40 years, but this might increase
to occurring every 8 years in 2100 under the
higher emissions scenario, and there would be no
appreciable change for the lower emissions path.
Even for drought conditions, it is important to
point out that model projections of the two emission
scenarios are based on averaging the output of
different models, each of which was run for a

continuous period extending from 1980 through
2100. Because each model simulation is the result of
a single model run rather than multiple runs from
which probabilities can be assigned, the modeling
results cannot accurately predict rare events with low
probability of occurrence (e.g., such as a 100-year
or longer recurrence interval). Thus the projections
reported here provide guidance on the likelihood of
moderate drought conditions, but cannot represent
the probability of an extreme multi-year drought
such as the drought of the mid-1960s. Water-supply
drought is more heavily affected by periods of low
precipitation extending over multiple months,
and is most strongly correlated with dry periods
persisting through winter and spring when soil
moisture, water tables, and reservoir levels would
normally experience recharge.
Long-term or water-supply droughts, where
rainfall deficits of more than 14 inches persist over
a period of two years or more occur slightly less
than 4% of the time at present in both observations
and the models (Figure 4.10). While this number
increases slightly to 5% under the higher emissions
scenario, the models do not predict a likely increase
in incidence of long-term drought. In contrast, the
models suggest that two-year precipitation excesses
of more than 14 inches, which are almost never
observed but occur 4% of the time in the models,
will occur much more frequently in the future.
The higher and lower emissions scenarios have 14
inch excesses in precipitation occurring 28% and
14% of the time respectively. Thus, the models
predict that while some moderate increase in shortterm droughts may occur, increases in extreme
precipitation events are more likely in the longTwo Year Precipitation Anomaly, Maryland
50

20th century data
20th century model

Probability of Occurrence

with reductions in soil moisture will likely cause
some regions of the state to experience increased
water demand for crop and landscape irrigation.
Frost days and growing season length are related
to model representation of temperature, and so there
is moderate confidence in our understanding of the
underlying mechanisms driving changes, although
the range of the model predictions leads to only
moderate likelihood. Nonetheless, all the models
predict reductions in frost days and increases in
growing season length.

2100 lower emissions

40

2100 higher emissions

30
20
10
0

<-15

-15 to -10 -10 to 0

0 to 10

10 to 15

>15

Inches of Precipitation
Figure 4.10. Long-term (two-year) drought and flood probability
in the present day observations and models, and for the low and
high emissions futures at the end of the century.

section 4: recent & likely climate changes in maryland • 23
and Pennsylvania.19 As was mentioned in Section
2, as the world warms increases in precipitation are
expected to be greater at higher latitudes than lower
latitudes. Maryland sits at the transition between the
northeastern region where increases in precipitation
are very likely in winter and spring, and the southeast
region where projections of changes in precipitation
cannot be confidently made.
At present, a watershed in Maryland might
experience more than 8 inches of rain in a single
day only once every 100 years. The climate models,
however, consider 2.5 inches of rain in a single day
to be a 100-year event. This is partly because the
2.5 inches of rain is spread evenly over more than
15,000 square miles in the model and because it
does not provide high resolution at smaller scales
(see Figure 3.2).
The percent of total rainfall coming in extreme
events is projected to increase modestly but steadily
during the century, with a slightly larger increase
under the higher emissions scenario. However,
this does not necessarily mean that less rain will
fall the rest of the time. The model averages project
only small changes in the number of days with
more than 10 mm (about four tenths of an inch) of
precipitation, with a slight increase under the lower
emissions scenario and a slight decrease under the
higher emissions scenario, by the end of the century.
Five-day maximum precipitation is projected to
increase more consistently from approximately 88
mm presently to 95-97 mm (i.e., from 3.4 to 3.8
inches), with little difference between higher and
lower emissions scenarios. The maximum one-day
precipitation over a year, a decade, and a century
is projected to increase more, particularly under

Maryland newspaper headlines failing corn crop due to lack of
rain in 2007.

Frieda Squires

Sean Clougherty

term. Further efforts to simulate extreme events at a
regional scale are needed to reduce uncertainty.
Changes in precipitation extremes in the United
States are already apparent in weather records.
A report to be published later this year for the
U.S. Climate Change Science Program (CCSP)
concludes that extreme precipitation episodes
(heavy downpours) have become more frequent
and more intense in recent
Heavy downpours have decades over most of North
become more frequent America and now account
for a larger percentage of
and intense in the U.S. total precipitation.13 Intense
precipitation (the heaviest 1%
of daily totals) in the continental U.S. increased by
20% over the past century while total precipitation
increased by 7%. The CCSP report further concludes
that the increase was consistent with increases
in atmospheric water vapor, which have been
associated with warming resulting from the increase
in greenhouse gases, and that precipitation is likely
to become less frequent and more intense. Under a
medium emissions scenario, daily precipitation so
heavy that it now occurs only once every 20 years is
projected to occur approximately every eight years
by the end of this century over much of eastern
North America.
For Maryland, the observed increase in
frequency of extreme precipitation has to this
point only been 3%, which is not a statistically
significant increase. However, significant increases
in intense precipitation of as much as 41% have
been documented for West Virginia, Delaware,

Heavy rain causes flooding and hazardous conditions for
roadways.

24  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
the higher emissions scenario near the end of the
century (Figure 4.11). The projected increases are
greater for longer recurrence intervals, consistent
with increasing climate volatility. But, again, it’s

important to remember that the global climate
models have limited ability to project extreme
rainfall events and tend to underestimate extreme
precipitation events.

3.5

3.0

current conditions
lower emissions scenario
higher emissions scenario

Inches per Day

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

mid-century late century

1 Year

mid-century late century

10 Year

mid-century late century

100 Year

Figure 4.11. Projected one-day maximum precipitation for 1, 10 and 100 year return frequencies. Models tend to under-estimate extreme
precipitation amounts, so the relative comparisons rather than the actual amounts are relevant.

section 5: water resources & aquatic ecosystems • 25

water resources & aquatic ecosystems
 Increased precipitation would supply reservoirs but not alleviate overdraft of aquifers.

Water supplies in the greater Baltimore area should not be diminished, but the adequacy of summer water supplies
in the greater Washington region is less certain. Any increases in precipitation are unlikely to alleviate the present
over-withdrawal of groundwater and summer droughts may increase groundwater demand for irrigation.

 Urban flooding will likely worsen because of intensification of rainfall events.

More intense rainfall resulting from large-scale and localized (e.g., urban canopy) climate effects are likely to increase
peak flooding in urban environments. Continued increase in impervious surfaces attendant with development
would exacerbate this problem.

 Aquatic ecosystems will likely be degraded by increased temperatures and flashy runoff.

Intensified rainfall events and warmer surfaces (roads, roofs, etc.) would result in rapid increases in stream
temperatures, limiting habitat suitability for native fishes and other organisms. Degraded streams would transmit
more nutrients and sediments to the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal tributaries.

T

he natural waters of
Maryland
provide
essential habitat for
aquatic life and support the
fundamental needs of every
economic sector of society. The
water cycle and the physical and
chemical character of natural waters
are both strongly dependent on climate patterns
and trends, including average and extreme weather
conditions, such as floods and droughts, that
although infrequent are very important. Although
this assessment is intended primarily to address
predictions associated with climate change, it is
important to recognize that such changes will occur
in the context of continuing population growth and
economic development. Past experience strongly
suggests that the combined impacts of climate
change and development on water resources and
aquatic ecosystems will be far greater than those
of climate change alone. Therefore, reasonable
predictions about Maryland’s future must consider
both factors.
This assessment addresses: (1) reliability of
freshwater supply, including both surface water
and groundwater; (2) changes in flood hazards; (3)
effects of changes in runoff and water temperature
on aquatic habitats and populations; (4) impacts on
water quality with implications for management

and regulation of sediments and nutrients; and
(5) potential salt contamination of aquifers and
freshwater intakes as the boundary between fresh
and brackish water shifts with rising sea level. These
impacts are examined with reference to climate
projections based on the higher and lower emissions
scenarios (see Section 3). The projections (Table 5.1)
are broadly consistent with previous assessments
conducted for the Mid-Atlantic region20 and to a
large extent with the Northeast Climate Impacts
Assessment.7

Maryland Sierra Club

Section 5

key points

Burnt Mills Dam, Maryland.

26  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
Table 5.1. Summary of general projections of climate models related to water resources.
Property

21st Century Projection

Precipitation

Winter precipitation is likely to increase with smaller changes in other seasons.
Wintertime runoff is likely to increase and summer runoff is likely to decrease, but with more
frequent and larger summer floods.

Soil moisture

Soil moisture is likely to decrease during the summer and fall toward the end of the century.

Snow volume

Snow volume is very likely to decline substantially during the mid-late century.

Heavy precipitation events

Heavy precipitation events are likely to increase.
Consecutive dry days and summer-fall (but not multi-year) droughts are likely to increase
under the higher emissions scenario.

3000

5.5

2500

4.5

2000

3.5

1500
1000

2.5
1.5

Population

Water stress—the imbalance between water demand
and available supply—is anticipated to increase in
many areas of the world over the coming decades.
This is partly a result of increases in demand and
partly a result of decreasing availability in some
areas. Water availability must be examined not
only in terms of average conditions, but also with
respect to the amounts available during droughts
that are expected to recur periodically. From a
global perspective, the region including Maryland is
considered as relatively low stress with regard to the
projected ratio of water withdrawals to availability
under the higher emissions (A2) scenario for 2050.21
As the Advisory Committee on the Management and
Protection of the State’s Water Resources noted in
2004: “Nature provides Marylanders with abundant
water, which, if well managed, could meet present
and future needs.” 22
On the other hand, this same report identifies
potential threats to water quantity and water
quality resulting from population growth and land
development. And, as recent difficulties in the
southeastern U.S. demonstrate, the eastern seaboard
is certainly not immune to drought.23 Within the
last six years in Maryland, we have witnessed two of
the driest years on record as well as the wettest year
on record, and there have been impacts on water
supplies during the dry years that required public
response. These short-term variations are larger
than the range of variation in mean precipitation or
moisture availability during this century predicted
using global climate models. Sensitivity of water
supply to wet and dry cycles is in large measure a
function of the nature of the water-supply system,
together with the array of management options that
are available to be used during times of shortage.
Recent evidence suggests that summer drought

may be correlated with patterns of sea-surface
temperature—a consequence of multi-year cycles
in the Atlantic (Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation)
or Pacific (El Niño-Southern Oscillation and the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation) oceans—and that
these correlations might be
used in drought forecasting Within six years,
over time periods of one or
Maryland experienced
two decades.24 It has been
suggested that superimposing some of the driest and
these cycles on longer the wettest years on
term trends projected by record
global climate models could
improve forecasting of drought probabilities and
provide a tool for water-supply management for the
greater Washington area in adaptation for global
warming.25
The Advisory Committee pointed out that total
water use in Maryland has not increased even
with the increase in population (Figure 5.1).26 This
reflects a complex set of changes in water used by
different economic sectors, with declining industrial
and commercial use and increasing domestic use,
public supply, and irrigation. Demand is anticipated
to rise over the next 30 years, coinciding with
increased suburban land development, affecting

(million gallons/day)

Freshwater Supply

Withdrawals of Water

Drought
		

(millions)

Runoff
		

500

water
population 0.5
0
0
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Year
Figure 5.1. Trends in Maryland’s water consumption and
population.26

section 5: water resources & aquatic ecosystems • 27
areas that might otherwise be available for recharge
of groundwater, and with increased irrigation needs
on agricultural land during summer droughts
anticipated with the warmer climate. Summer water
demand will increase as temperatures increase and
water availability during the summer becomes less
reliable. Options for demand reduction do exist but
have not been fully explored by utilities and public
agencies.
Marylanders rely both on surface water, derived
from free-flowing streams and from storage in watersupply reservoirs, and on groundwater retrieved
from wells in both shallow and deeper confined
aquifers. The relative importance of these sources
varies both as a function of urban versus rural
location and physiographic
province (Figure 5.2). Surface
Groundwater
water is the primary source in
withdrawals increased and around major metropolitan
by 21% between 1985 areas with about 3.2 million
and 2000
of the state’s population of
5.4 million (based on 2004
estimates; present population is at least 5.7 million)
served by public water supply in the Baltimore and
Washington, D.C. metropolitan areas.26 Public and
community water-supply systems elsewhere, using
a mix of surface water and groundwater, served a
cumulative population of 1.3 million. Groundwater
is the primary source of supply in rural areas
where public water is not available and in most of
the Coastal Plain, with 900,000 people relying on
private wells. Surface water withdrawals increased
by 6% between 1985 and 2000, whereas groundwater
withdrawals increased by 21%.
Although agriculture accounts for only 3 to 5%
of state water use at the present time, agricultural
needs of 285 million gallons per day (mgd) statewide
are anticipated by 2030—more than currently used
Physiographic Regions of Maryland
Valley
Appalachian & Ridge
Blue
Plateau
Ridge

Piedmont

Coastal Plain

0

50 miles

N

Figure 5.2. Maryland’s five physiographic regions.

F
L

by the Baltimore metropolitan area. Much of this
increased demand will be associated with irrigated
agriculture on the Eastern Shore.26 Furthermore,
over half of the new households anticipated by 2030
will likely be located in the rapidly growing counties
of Howard, Harford, Frederick, Carroll, Charles,
Calvert, and St. Mary’s. Many of these counties
are already experiencing water stress because of
rapid exploitation of local supplies, resulting in
building moratoria in parts of Carroll County27 and
rapid declines in well levels in confined aquifers of
southern Maryland.28

Surface water

The major metropolitan water-supply systems in
Maryland rely on a mix of impoundments and
direct withdrawal from major rivers. Baltimore
City supplies water to Baltimore County as well as
a portion of the public water-supply needs of Anne
Arundel, Howard, Harford, and Carroll counties.
The City has three major water-supply reservoirs
with cumulative storage of 86.7 billion gallons, as
well as a pipeline that can be used to augment the
reservoir supply with water from the Susquehanna
River during times of extreme drought.29
Cumulative safe yield of the reservoirs is nearly
240 mgd and the intake on the Susquehanna River
currently has a capacity of 250 mgd with ultimate
capacity of 500 mgd. There are additional pumping
stations on Deer Creek that can expand capacity
further if necessary.
The climate change scenarios described in
Section 3 suggest an increased frequency of shortterm drought despite a net increase in average
annual flow. Baltimore has managed to weather two
severe droughts since 2000 without serious negative
impacts, although it was necessary to pump water
from the Susquehanna and this involved increased
treatment costs. It is likely that Baltimore City’s
water-supply system should be sufficient to meet
demands under the projected climate change.
Greater winter-spring precipitation will increase the
likelihood that reservoirs will be full heading into
the drier summer periods, resulting in protection
from water-supply shortages for areas served by the
reservoirs.30
The Washington Metropolitan Area’s water
supply situation is somewhat more precarious.
Average annual water use (including Maryland,
D.C., and Virginia users) currently is about 488
mgd and projections call for an increase to 572 mgd
by 2025.31 About 75% of the water supply is derived
from the Potomac River, the flow of which is largely

28  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
unregulated. A total storage volume of about 17
billion gallons is available in reservoirs to augment
the supply of the Potomac River during dry periods,
and additional storage of about 18 billion gallons is
available in other suburban reservoirs that do not
connect directly to the Potomac supply. A Water
Supply Coordination Agreement and a Low Flow
Allocation Agreement among the various water
suppliers are intended to coordinate the operation
of all the water utilities in the region and to allocate
shortfalls when water is insufficient to meet all
demands.
The Interstate Commission on the Potomac
River Basin (ICPRB) has estimated that the existing
system is adequate to meet 2025 demand, and even
2045 demand, under a repeat of the worst historical
drought conditions.31 The ICPRB concluded that,
even accounting for uncertainties associated with
climate change, contingencies in place to restrict
demand could be used to avert a water-supply
crisis. However, Maryland’s Advisory Committee
on the Management and Protection of the State’s
Water Resources observed that planning has been
complicated by the outcome of a 2003 Supreme
Court case that gave Virginia the right to remove
water from the Potomac River without following
Maryland’s permit regulations.22 Furthermore, even
if this issue can be resolved by mutual agreement,
other measures, including development of additional
supplies and water reuse, may be necessary to meet
local needs.

Groundwater

Groundwater in the Piedmont and Appalachian
Plateau regions occurs principally in fractured
bedrock and the overlying layer of weathered
material that can be as much as 100 feet thick (Figure
5.3).32 The volume of storage available in these
shallow aquifers is typically quite limited and there
are strong connections between groundwater and
local surface water, such that a reduction in
groundwater storage is likely to be reflected
in reduced base flow to local streams. Because
of the complex flowpaths and connectivity
of the fracture network, the spatial pattern of
groundwater availability is unpredictable and is
therefore unsuitable for large-scale water-supply
development. Groundwater availability is sensitive
to short-term climate fluctuations and to alteration
of the land surface by development. These factors,
plus the growing demand, led to the building
moratoria near Westminster in Carroll County that
were mentioned previously.27

Not to scale
Figure 5.3. In the Piedmont, shallow wells draw from unconfined
weathered bedrock and deep wells from bedrock aquifers.32

Although climate models generally project
changes in water availability under average
conditions, the likelihood of more frequent shortterm drought poses a challenge to the reliability of
water supply dependent on shallow groundwater
during the late summer and fall in rural areas.
Even with significant increases in winter and spring
precipitation, it is not clear how much of the increase
will contribute to recharge of groundwater in the
Piedmont and Appalachian provinces if significant
amounts are instead diverted to increased runoff.
The situation in the Coastal Plain of Maryland
is quite different. Most groundwater is stored in
deep, confined aquifers (Figure 5.4) that are not in
direct contact with the surface or with overlying
streams. Because the water that recharges these

Not to scale
Figure 5.4. Schematic cross-section of the Coastal Plain aquifer
system.33

section 5: water resources & aquatic ecosystems • 29

Groundwater Level (feet below land surface)

aquifers may travel over long distances, these
aquifers are not sensitive to short-term weather
fluctuations. They are more likely to experience
changes in storage and in well levels that are tied to
long-term trends in the balance between recharge
and water withdrawal. Thus, climate change
projections in which precipitation increases more
than evapotranspiration are less likely to pose a
serious problem for aquifer storage, even if there
are short-term droughts superimposed on the longterm trends.
A serious challenge does arise, however, as a result
of pumping trends associated with rapid urban and
suburban development in the Coastal Plain counties.
Long-term trends showing declining well levels have
accelerated sharply since the 1980s (Figure 5.5).33
In many cases, the rate of decline exceeds 2 ft/yr
and in the areas of most active
pumping it can be substantially
Well levels have
The
Maryland
declined as much as 2’ higher.32
Department of Environment
per year in Maryland’s
uses an 80% rule to regulate
Coastal Plain
groundwater extraction from
confined aquifers—pumping is
not supposed to lower well levels more than 80%
of the distance between the pre-pumping water
level and the top of the confined aquifer. At present,
however, farmers are not required to report the
amount of water pumped for irrigation and there
are no significant ongoing monitoring studies to
document head losses associated with irrigation.
While the declines in well levels currently observed
are mainly a result of urban and suburban uses,
this lack of reporting and monitoring could pose a
problem if demand for crop irrigation substantially
increased.
If the regional declines in confined aquifers
continues or accelerates, regional land subsidence
0

50

100

150
180
1960

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2004

Figure 5.5. Water level decline in a well in the Aquia aquifer in
Calvert County, Maryland.33

over the affected areas may exacerbate local relative
sea-level rise as discussed in Section 7. Changes in
freshwater storage and in relative sea level may
also cause the freshwater/saltwater boundary
illustrated in Figure 5.4 to move landward and to
reach shallower depths. This may pose a particular
problem for withdrawals from shallow aquifers on
the Eastern Shore.

Flood Hazards
Because floods represent the extreme end of the
frequency distribution of streamflows, prediction
of flood probabilities is subject to uncertainty even
under the best of circumstances. Estimation of the
probability or return period of a flood of a given size
typically is accomplished using historical records,
and standard estimation techniques assume that
flood occurrence is essentially a random process
and that the underlying probabilities are not
changing over time. Therefore, climate change
presents a challenge to standard approaches in
flood-frequency estimation because the future will
no longer resemble the past.
Trends toward increased river runoff are already
apparent beginning about 1970 in portions of the
eastern United States, including the Mid-Atlantic
region.34 Annual runoff has further been projected
to increase in the eastern United States by the
middle of this century35, consistent with increases
in atmospheric water vapor and precipitation
intensity.36 The probability of occurrence of a
great flood (defined as having a 100-yr return
period) in a number of large river basins had
increased substantially during the 20th century37,
prompting a group of leading hydrologists to write
recently that climate change has undermined
a basic assumption about the relevance of past
observations for management of future water
supplies, demands, and risks.38 The authors
suggest that new modeling approaches are needed
to improve our ability to estimate flood hazards
under alternative future scenarios. Although
intense rainfall is the most important contributor
to flood hazards, there are other aspects of landsurface conditions that determine how efficiently
intense rainfall is converted into flood flow. These
cannot be predicted on a statewide basis for all
watersheds with information that is currently
available; therefore, this report focuses on the
probability of intense precipitation as the primary
indicator of flood probability.

Susquehanna River Basin Flood Forecasting
and Warning System

30 • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

The Susquehanna River Basin is one of the most flood-prone
watersheds in the nation. The main stem and its tributaries drain
27,510 square miles of New York, Pennsylvania, and Maryland.

As discussed earlier, probabilities of flood
inducing rainfall are not well represented in global
climate models that predict average conditions over
large grid cells. A possible exception would be largescale events such as powerful extratropical storms
occurring in winter, particularly where rain on snow
is a key element. These may generate large floods
over very large drainage areas comparable to the
model grid cells. Such events occur infrequently in
Maryland, but can be important in the Susquehanna
River Basin, which lies mostly in Pennsylvania
and New York and supplies about one-half of the
freshwater inflow to the Chesapeake Bay. The
January 1996 flood in the Susquehanna River basin
is an example of such an event. The magnitude of
the flood was in part a result of the large volume
of moisture already stored on the landscape in the
form of snow, which was released very rapidly as
it melted during the precipitation event. Although
climate models project higher precipitation totals
and greater intensity of rainfall during the winter
season, the reduction in volume of snow stored on
the landscape may well cause a reduction in the
likelihood of this type of extreme flood even as
moderate floods become more likely in winter and
early spring.
Another major cause of flood hazards in the
region is the occurrence of hurricanes and tropical

cyclones. The flood of record for many locations
in Maryland (including the Susquehanna River at
Conowingo Dam) is still Hurricane Agnes, which
struck the region in June 1972.39 By the time it
reached Maryland, Agnes was
not a major cause of storm Precipitation intensities
surge, wind damage or coastal
in small watersheds
flooding; its primary impact
was as a rainfall-runoff event. are underestimated in
Hurricane Floyd, in September climate models
1999, dropped as much as 12.6
inches of rain on Maryland’s Eastern Shore and
generated floods in some Eastern Shore rivers with
estimated return periods of 100-500 years.40 As
discussed in greater depth in Section 7, the current
scientific consensus is that tropical cyclones are
projected to increase in rainfall intensity even
though their frequency may decline.
For small watersheds, the likelihood of
flooding depends not only on total amount of
precipitation but also on its intensity at smaller
spatial and temporal scales. While climate models
may be useful for projecting maximum one-day
precipitation averaged over a large area (Figure
5.2), they cannot predict the actual rainfall over
short periods or areas at a scale comparable to a
storm cell. Point and small-area rainfall intensities
associated with flood generation will be much
higher. This is illustrated by comparing the
predicted probabilities of intense precipitation
from the model projections with precipitation
frequencies based on regional observations
for points within the Baltimore-Washington
metropolitan area (Table 5.2).41 Observed rainfall
amounts associated with recurrence intervals of 1
to 100 years are already 170 to 300 percent greater
than the one-day rainfall amounts projected from
the climate models near the end of this century.
If flood magnitudes change in a manner
commensurate with the trends in maximum rainfall
predictions (Figure 4.11), then one might indeed

Table 5.2. Maximum rainfall amounts for four recurrence intervals based on observations in the Baltimore-Washington area, as
summarized in NOAA Atlas 14 and projected for 2090 under higher and lower emissions scenarios.
Recurrence		
Interval (yr)
Observed41

One-day Rainfall Amounts (inches)
Higher Emissions
Lower Emissions

1

2.6

1.7

1.6

5

4.1

2.4

2.0

10

4.9

2.6

2.3

100

8.5

3.2

2.7

section 5: water resources & aquatic ecosystems • 31
100000

Peak Discharge in ft3/s

expect to see larger, more extreme floods in smaller
watersheds as the century proceeds. The magnitude
of such an increase is necessarily speculative; the
point values of extreme rainfall under the present
climate are already so much higher than those
predicted by these GCM scenarios that only the
general trends are relevant, and they are not based
on simulation of the actual physical processes
associated with extreme precipitation. Nevertheless,
if one accepts the comparisons in maximum one-day
rainfall as representative of likely changes in flood
magnitude, then we might anticipate a 20% increase
in the magnitude of the 100-year flood under the
higher emissions scenario and a 10% increase under
the lower emissions scenario. Comparable increases
for the 10-year recurrence interval would be
approximately 29% and 16%, respectively, with the
increase in peak flood flows under higher emissions
approximately double the increase under lower
emissions.
These increases are consistent with the trends
identified by the IPCC Fourth Assessment, the
Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment, and the
U.S. Climate Change Science Program concerning
the increased likelihood of intense, flood-generating
precipitation. However, it is important to remember
that land development has had and will continue to
have a major effect on increasing flood probabilities
in smaller drainage areas. As the area of impervious
surface and storm drain networks increase, runoff
is accelerated.42 Also, as was demonstrated with
a 2004 event in Baltimore, the urban ‘canopy’
effect can play an important role in determining
the conditions favoring intense thunderstorms.43
Because of both these effects—surface properties
affecting runoff response and
interactions
Land development and atmospheric
affecting rainfall intensity—
urban microclimates
flood peak magnitudes in
intensify floods
small urban watersheds may
be several times larger than for
comparable rural watersheds. This can be illustrated
by plotting flood peak discharge as a function
of drainage area for thunderstorms in Baltimore
compared to some record floods in the Mid-Atlantic
region (Figure 5.6). The straight lines are thresholds
defining the upper range of extreme flood peaks
that may attain values between 1000 and 2000 cfs/
mi2. The urban floods were, with one exception,
events with recurrence intervals of the order of 5 to
10 years; yet these events, represented by blue dots
on the plot, were comparable in magnitude to MidAtlantic floods that occur much less frequently.

10000

Baltimore summer thunderstorms
Rapidan 1995
Camille 1969
Agnes 1972
June 1949
Smethport, PA 1942
Sauls Run 2003
1000 cfs/mi2
2000 cfs/mi2

1000

100
0

10

100

Drainage Area in mi2

Figure 5.6. Relationship between peak discharges and watershed
drainage area for urban floods in Baltimore and historic floods in
the Mid-Atlantic region.

The increased frequency and magnitude of floods
in urban watersheds has implications not only for
flood protection and water allocation, but also for
the design of treatment plants, dams, and even
bridges. Prediction of future estimates will require
the development of new modeling approaches that
can incorporate the effects of changing climate
superimposed on trends in urban development.
Using such an approach, a recent study projected
that the number of days with extreme rainfall in
the New York metropolitan area is likely to increase
from 1-2 days to 3-4 days by the end of the summer
under the higher emissions (A2) scenario.44 Building
on efforts like this one, smaller scale atmospheric
models linked with global climate models could
more accurately project precipitation and those
predictions could be used to drive hydrologic
models to predict flood probabilities associated
with combined climate change and urbanization
scenarios.

water quality & aquatic
biota
Freshwater ecosystems provide multiple goods
and services (Table 5.3) valued highly by people
and inextricably linked to water flows and the
interaction of flow with the landscape. The ability
of aquatic ecosystems to provide these benefits
depends on how ‘healthy’ they are—that is, the
degree to which physical and biological processes
that maintain normal ecological functioning are
working properly. Climate changes may modify
these critical processes and thus diminish the health
of the ecosystem.
Of particular concern are climate-induced
changes that exacerbate human-caused stresses,

32  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
Table 5.3. Freshwater ecosystems (wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, etc.) provide a number of goods and services that are critical to
their health and provide benefits to society. The major services are outlined along with the ecological processes that support the
function, how it is measured, and why it is important.45
Ecosystem
Service

Supporting Ecological
Process

Ecosystem/
Habitat

Water Purification Excess nutrients
a) nutrient
processing

(eutrophication) can build up in
the water making it unsuitable
for drinking or supporting life;
Algal blooms resulting from
excess nutrients can lead to
anoxic conditions and death of
biota

Retention, storage, and
transformation of excess
nitrogen and phosphorus;
Decomposition of organic
matter

Floodplain, river and
streambeds, wetlands, lake
littoral zones

b) processing of
contaminants

Toxic contaminants kill biota;
Excess sediments smother
invertebrates, foul the gills of
fish, etc; Water not potable

Biological removal by plants and
microbes of materials such as
excess sediments, heavy metals,
contaminants, etc.

Floodplain and wetland soils
and plants; Bottom sediments
of rivers, lakes, and wetlands

Water Supply

Loss of clean water supply for
residential, commercial, and
urban use; Irrigation supply for
agriculture

Transport of clean water
throughout watersheds

Lakes, rivers, streams

Flood Control

Without the benefits of
floodplains, healthy stream
corridors, and watershed
vegetation, increased flood
frequency and flood magnitude

Slowing of water flow from land to
Floodplains, wetlands,
freshwater body so flood frequency
stream-side zones
and magnitude reduced; Intact
floodplains and stream-side vegetation
buffer increases in discharge

Infiltration

Lost groundwater storage
for private and public use;
Vegetation and soil biota suffer;
Increased flooding in streams

Intact floodplain, stream-side,
wetland vegetation increase
infiltration of rain water and
increase aquifer recharge

Wetlands, streams,
floodplains

Carbon
Sequestration

Water and atmospheric levels of
CO2 build up, contributing to
global warming

Aquatic plants and algae
remove CO2 from the water and
atmosphere, convert this into
biomass thereby storing carbon

Freshwater ecosystems with
sunlight, but particularly
shallow water habitats such
as wetlands or mid-order
streams

b) secondary
production

Water and atmospheric
levels of CO2 would build up
contributing to global warming

Production of biomass by
microbes and metazoans stores
carbon until their death

All freshwater ecosystems
but particularly the bottom
sediments for microbes

Nitrogen
Sequestration

Secondary production supports
fish and wildlife

Creation of plant or animal
tissue over time

All freshwater ecosystems and
habitats

Food Production

Reduction in food and food
products derived from aquatic
plants such as algae, rice,
watercress, etc.; Decreased
production (secondary) by those
consumers who rely on primary
production as a food source

Production of new plant tissue

All freshwater ecosystems
and habitats with sunlight
but particularly shallow water
habitats such as wetlands

a) primary
production

primary and
secondary
production

a) primary
production

Consequences of Losing
the Service

section 5: water resources & aquatic ecosystems • 33
Table 5.3. Continued.
Ecosystem
Service

Consequences of Losing
the Service

Supporting Ecological
Process

Ecosystem/
Habitat

Food Production

Reduction in fisheries including
finfish, crustaceans, shellfish,
and other invertebrates

Production of new animal tissue
or microbial biomass

All freshwater ecosystems and
habitats, but particularly the
water column and surficial
sediments

Biodiversity

Loss of aesthetic features,
impacts aquarium trade,
potential destabilization of food
web, loss of keystone species can
impact water quality

Diverse freshwater habitats,
watersheds in native vegetation,
complex ecological communities
support multiple trophic levels

All ecosystem and habitat
types, but particularly
wetlands for plants and rivers
for fish

Temperature
Regulation

If infiltration or shading are
reduced (due to clearing of
vegetation along stream), stream
water heats up beyond what
biota are capable of tolerating

Water temperature is ‘buffered’ if
there is sufficient soil infiltration
in the watershed; Shading
vegetation keeps the water cool;
Water has a high heat capacity
which stores excess heat

Shallow water habitats,
especially wetlands

Erosion/Sediment
Control

Aquatic habitat burial impacts
fisheries, decreases biodiversity,
increases in contaminant
transport, reduces downstream
lake or reservoir storage volume

Intact stream-side vegetation
and minimization of overland
flow

Wetlands, streams, and rivers

Recreation/
Tourism/Cultural,
Religious, or
Inspirational
Values

Lost opportunities for people to
relax, spend time with family;
Economic losses to various
industries, particularly tourist
oriented ones

Clean water, particularly water
bodies with pleasant natural
surroundings such as forests,
natural wildlife refuges, or
natural wonders

Lakes, rivers, and streams

Victoria Coles

b) secondary
production

A beautiful day is enjoyed on a family hike in western Maryland.

34  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
such as depletion of water flows and urbanization,
both of which are already affecting streams and
rivers over much of the State. As is the case with flood
probabilities, the influence of urban development
signal is likely to be at least as strong through the
remainder of this century as the climate signal, and
these two signals combined will tend to reinforce
trends pointing in the same direction, i.e., more
highly variable flows. Global warming will also
directly change the temperature regimes, causing
shifts in the species inhabiting the ecosystems.
Anticipating the future condition of a river in the
face of climate change requires explicit consideration
not only of the current climatic, hydrologic, and
ecological conditions but also of how it is currently
managed and how human behavior will affect the
ecosystems. Thus, consideration of how climate
change is likely to impact Maryland’s freshwater
ecosystems rests not only on the assumptions
underlying climate models and scenarios, but also on
future decisions regarding water use and watershed
management. Options also exist for adapting these
practices to reduce the impacts of climate change on
freshwater ecosystems.46
Except for deep reservoirs, fresh waters are
generally well mixed and respond to changes
in atmospheric conditions fairly readily. Thus,
they would become warmer as air temperatures
increase.47 As the water warms, individual growth
and reproductive rates of biota are expected to
increase so long as thermal tolerances are not
exceeded.48 Faster growth rates and time to
maturation typically result in smaller adult size, and,
because size is closely related to reproductive output
in many aquatic organisms, population sizes may
decline over time. The spawning time of native fish
may also shift earlier if waters begin to warm earlier

in the spring, and species that require prolonged
periods of low temperatures may not survive.
For fish, amphibians, and water-dispersed plants,
habitat fragmentation due to small dams (which are
surprisingly common in Maryland’s streams) or the
isolation of wetlands and tributaries due to drought
conditions may also result in elimination of their
local populations. Because higher temperatures
result in lower concentrations of dissolved oxygen
in all but swift flowing waters, this may present an
additional stress on organisms.49
Aquatic ecosystems in watersheds with significant
urban development are expected to experience not
only the greatest changes in temperature, but also
greater temperature spikes during and immediately
following rain storms that could result in the local
loss of species. Such temperature spikes of 6 to
12°F occur in urban streams near Washington,
D.C., and are strongly related to the amount of
warm impervious surfaces (Figure 5.7).50A recent
modeling study demonstrated how the combined
effects of urbanization and climate change on
suburban Washington streams would be greater
than either alone. Under a moderate emissions
(B2) scenario, warming produced an increase in
stream temperatures of 6°F late in the century,
while urbanization produced an increase of 7°F
(Figure 5.8). However, when both urbanization and
climate change were imposed, an increase of over
12°F resulted. The urbanization effects alone would
stress 8 of the 39 fish species, but with additional
effects of climate change, as many as 29 species
would be stressed. Almost every recreationally
important species (trout, bass, yellow perch, and
bluegill) would experience decline in the growth
and reproduction ranging from 40% to 90%.
Changes in flow regime toward greater frequency

1.5

35

discharge
30

1.0
25
0.5
20

0.0
Jun 01

Jun 11

Jun 21

Jul 01

Jul 11

Jul 21

Temperature (ºC)

Discharge (cu m/s)

water temperature

15
Jul 31

Date
Figure 5.7. Temperature record for an urban stream north of Washington, D.C. Grey spikes represent episodes of warm runoff immediately
following rain. Spikes such as these are largely dampened in watersheds with low levels of impervious cover.50

section 5: water resources & aquatic ecosystems • 35

Projected Water Temperature (ºC)

35
30
25
20
simultaneous scenario
urbanization only
climate change only
baseline scenario

15
10
May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Date in 2090
Figure 5.8. Model projections of water temperatures in a central
Maryland stream under a moderate emissions (B2) scenario, the
influence of urbanization and both simultaneously.49

of both wetter and drier conditions are projected
under both the higher and lower emissions
scenarios. While these changes are anticipated to be
incremental, similar but much stronger effects are
observed in urbanizing environments. Storm runoff
occurs more rapidly and generates higher velocities
and larger flood peaks, with serious consequences
for the aquatic biota.51 Higher peak flows associated
with urbanization result in well-documented
decreases in native biodiversity.52 Higher flows
increase suspended sediment and bedload transport,
which interferes with animal
feeding, while subsequent
Higher runoff peaks
sediment deposition reduces
degrade stream beds
the habitat availability for
and transport more
insects and spawning areas
pollutants to the Bay
for fish.53 Where flows
increase
sufficiently
to
prevent sediment deposition, eroded sediment
will ultimately be deposited downstream or in the
estuaries fed by the rivers and streams. The higher
flows and increased inputs of sediment typically
degrade stream habitat quality even when there is
no net sediment deposition.
Increased flashiness and higher runoff peaks
are likely to mobilize chemicals associated with
sediment particles. Changes in the transport and
processing of nutrients and organic matter are likely,
but difficult to predict under changing climatic
conditions. There is a considerable uncertainty
about how rates of ecological processes affecting
nutrients in wetlands and streams—an important
factor in affecting the amount of nutrients reaching
the already over-enriched Chesapeake Bay—will be
influenced by climate change. Dissolved inorganic

nitrogen (as nitrate) levels may decrease if rates of
denitrification are increased by higher temperatures
and associated lower dissolved oxygen levels. On
the other hand, if discharge and sediment transport
increase, then the downstream movement of
nitrogen (as ammonium or organic nitrogen)
and phosphorus (as phosphate) may increase.
Concentrations of toxic contaminants in the form
of petroleum hydrocarbons and combustion
byproducts, metals, pesticides, and other organic
compounds are typically much greater in urban
settings and are related in part to the density of
roads and efficiency of storm sewers in conveying
materials from impervious surfaces directly into
the drainage network.54 Additional sources of
trace contaminants may be derived from leaking
sanitary sewers and include oxygen-demanding
organic matter, pathogens, and a whole class of
emerging contaminants including pharmaceutical
compounds and trace constituents from personal
care products.55
Drier conditions during summer months are
likely to result in the loss of small wetlands and
intermittent or ephemeral streams, potentially
resulting in negative impacts on the water quality
downstream. This impact will be particularly
exacerbated in urbanized regions. With increased
impervious area and less infiltration, there is less
groundwater storage and lower baseflows in urban
streams than in more natural streams. However,
baseflow during dry periods could also be augmented
by some combination of leaking infrastructure
and lawn irrigation. A tendency toward reduced
infiltration and baseflow would tend to exacerbate
the lower summer stream flows projected by the
climate models, while any baseflow augmentation
would reduce the impacts of summer dry periods.
Wetlands and streams experiencing reductions in
water levels or baseflow often have stressed biota and
stream-side vegetation, reduced dissolved oxygen
levels, and loss of habitat for species that depend
on currents.56 Physiological stress and increased
predation resulting from crowding, combined with
habitat fragmentation (isolated stream pools and
wetlands), may dramatically reduce survival and
constrain dispersal.

Jane Hawkey

36  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Adrian Jones

Herbicides are applied to a farm field.

Crop production is likely to be reduced under the higher emissions scenario.

section 6: farms & forests • 37

farms & forests

Section 6

key points
 Crop production may increase initially, but then decline if emissions are not reduced.

Longer growing season and higher CO2 levels are likely to increase crop production modestly during the first half of
the century. Later in the century, crop production is likely to be reduced due to heat stress and summer drought
under the higher emissions scenario. Milk and poultry production would be also reduced by heat stress.

 Northern hardwoods will likely disappear and pines become more abundant.

The maple-beech-birch forest of Western Maryland is likely to fade away and pine trees to become more dominant
in Maryland forests. Forest productivity is likely to decline late in the century under the higher emissions scenario
as a result of heat stress, drought, and climate-related disturbances.

 Biodiversity of plants and animals associated with Maryland forests is likely to decline.

Habitat alterations resulting from climate change may force out 34 or more bird species, including the Baltimore
oriole.

M

aryland’s landscapes,
from the high
mountains of the
Appalachian Plateau to the
barrier islands of the Eastern
Shore, provide diversity and
enjoyment to its people and
visitors as well economic wealth from
the productivity of its farms and forests. This section
addresses the potential impacts of climate change
on the land, including the living resources that are
exploited economically and other natural resources
that provide indirect services to us, not the least of
which provide recreation and aesthetic satisfaction.
Prediction of the future of Maryland’s natural
resources is subject not only in the projections of
climate model, but also because of the complexity of
the responses of both living organisms and human
decisions when faced with changing climate. The
response of one species can affect others, for example
warmer winters could allow some insect pests to
survive in greater numbers, possibly increasing
forest defoliation—and consequently, a loss of birds
and other animal species—and runoff of materials
from the watershed. Furthermore, the changes in
vegetation may affect the regional climate itself, for
example, through changes in the evapotranspiration,
albedo (how an object reflects sunlight), and surface
roughness of vegetation. Moreover, organisms
influence the concentrations of greenhouse gases

in the atmosphere by taking up or releasing carbon
dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. Partially as a
result of this complexity, knowledge of the impacts
of climate change on terrestrial resources is less
developed and predictions more difficult than for
other sectors of the climate impact assessment for
Maryland.
Climate change is not new for Maryland’s
terrestrial ecosystems. During the warming after
the last Ice Age, very large changes in the biota
occurred, but this was a slow warming that allowed
migration and adaptation of plants and animals,
unlike the rate of climate change projected over
the 21st century. As discussed previously, the mean
temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere has been
relatively stable until warming commenced about
50 years ago. After some basic considerations related
to terrestrial ecosystems, in general, this section
evaluates the likely impacts of projected climate
change on Maryland’s agriculture and forests.

Some Basic Considerations
Before getting to the specifics of the assessment of
climate change impacts on Maryland’s terrestrial
ecosystems, it is useful to consider the complexity of
likely responses to climate change, the other human
activities that influence these responses, the means
of observing changes, and the particular geographic
conditions that may influence outcomes.

38  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Responses are complex

Ben Fertig

Shifts in distribution of terrestrial vegetation
of hundreds of miles in eastern North America
occurred in association with the 3.6°F increase in
global average temperature following the last Ice
Age.57 For example, one tree species, Jack Pine,
moved about 800 miles north from the southern
U.S. to Canada, passing through Maryland at an
average of a quarter of a mile per year.58 Numerous
studies documenting more recent geographical
shifts of the distribution of species toward the
poles (in Maryland northwards) and toward higher
elevation due to climate warming were summarized
in the IPCC Fourth Assessment5 and a recent CCSP
synthesis report.59 A small state such as Maryland
can expect a greater proportion of its species to be
lost to the north and gained from the south than in
a larger state. These changes could be beneficial or
deleterious. Not all species can adjust successfully.
Biomes (broad geographic zones having distinct
climates and species) that shift in a quickly
warming world are likely to lose a portion of their
species complement.59 This loss could also disrupt
important ecosystem functions if one or more
ecologically important species is lost.
In agriculture and commercial forestry, human
skill and knowledge can allow for some adaptation
to climate change; for example, by changing crop and

plantation tree species, and controlling new pest and
diseases artificially. If all else fails, products that can
no longer be produced in Maryland economically
could be imported from elsewhere. And, other
commodities will be produced that are not produced
under today’s climate. Some impacts on agriculture
and forestry may be seen as beneficial and others
would require adaptation but at an increased cost.
A significant and already apparent effect of
warming on plants is to hasten the beginning of the
growing season and prolong it in the fall. But while a
shorter winter and earlier arrival of cherry blossoms
may be welcomed, overwintering of plant pests that
currently are killed by winter cold could also occur.
Heat waves and drought can cause mortality directly
through increased stress and reduced growth. Forests
which grow more rapidly because of the carbon
dioxide fertilization effect—plants require CO2
for photosynthesis and an increase in atmospheric
carbon dioxide can increase growth—may become
increasingly fire-prone or subject to insect outbreaks.
Animals, both livestock and wildlife, are affected
directly by climate and indirectly through changes in
the frequency and extent of pest outbreaks, spread of
invasive species, animal and plant diseases, extreme
weather events, and wildfire.
As ecosystems respond to climate changes,
there will be not only changes in species found in

Wicomico County, Maryland, marshlands and forest share waterway with agriculture and development.

Jane Thomas

section 6: farms & forests • 39

Forest cleared for agriculture in one watershed of Maryland’s Coastal Bays.

Maryland and in biodiversity, in general, but also
in the ecosystem services they provide. Ecosystem
services are the benefits to humans that arise from
the functioning of ecosystems, but without deliberate
action by humans. These include purification of
air and water by plants, decomposition of wastes
by microbes, soil renewal, pollination of crops,
groundwater recharge by wetlands, maintenance
of potentially-useful genetic races, removal of
greenhouse gases from the atmosphere by carbon
sequestration, and provision for recreation in
aesthetically pleasing landscapes.

Land use will affect responses

Climate change is taking place in the context of
other rapid changes affecting terrestrial ecosystems,
agriculture, and forestry. These include continued
exurban development, conversion of natural
vegetation to farms and pastures, and changes in air
and water quality. Many of these factors affect more
than one ecosystem or resource simultaneously and
interact with each other, often compounding their
individual effects.
An important factor in the response of living
organisms to current and future warming that did
not exist during the post-glacial warming is the
extensive fragmentation of natural landscapes by
cities, suburbs, farms, highways, and other features.

Some species will be slowed in their northward
migration by their requirement for specific habitats
of suitable size—habitats that, for these species, are
now broken into fragments within an impassable
matrix of the human landscape. This will favor
species capable of “jump dispersal,” in which a
few individuals can reach new, suitable habitats by
occasional transport over long distances by wind
and water or hitching a ride on vehicles or birds.
Some species, such as weedy plants, are more
likely to move by jump dispersal; others such as
amphibians are very unlikely to do so. Species
with very specific habitat requirements and limited
dispersal capability, including many plants, may fail
to move and could become, at least locally, extinct.

Observing changes is challenging

Our current capacity to observe meteorological
and ecological changes is insufficient to provide
early indicators and assess the effects of climate
change on Maryland’s agriculture, forestry, and
terrestrial ecosystems. Meteorological sites on
the ground are few in number and limited in
the range of measurements they make. The role
of these sites in weather forecasting has not
been diminished by the development of satellite
measurements and computer models; in fact, higher
quality observations are required by the models.

40 • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
Furthermore, ground meteorological stations are
irreplaceable for documenting climate variability
and change. Studies in other regions have
documented changes in the distributions of various
plants and animals that are likely the result of
recent climate change.60 Earth resource satellite
observations offer a different approach. Satellite
data can provide a record of changes in vegetation
types and extent, carbon fixation, land cover, and
human habitation—all essential components
of a climate change monitoring and adaptive
management system. While satellite measurements
have been made over Maryland for over 30 years,
the data have not been systematically acquired and
archived. The existing record of crop yields by the
National Agricultural Statistics Service (from 1961),
the Forest Inventory and Analysis program (from
1953), the Maryland Biological Stream Survey (from
2000), the Breeding Bird Survey (from 1966), and
Christmas Bird Count (from 1900) all contribute
key information in a period of rapid climate change,
but they are alone.

Agriculture

A slice of the regional landscape

Crop species differ in their critical temperature
range for growth and development. Growth
and development of a particular crop requires
temperatures at some minimum temperature,
are fastest at some optimal temperature, and
slows down and finally ceases at a temperature
maximum. Vegetative development usually has a
higher optimum temperature than reproductive
development. At elevated temperatures, the life
cycle of a grain crop will progress more rapidly but
may reduce yield owing to the shorter time available
to fill the grain. High temperatures can also result
in failure in pollination and grain setting. Yield
responses to temperature vary among species based

Maryland is a cross-section of the Mid-Atlantic, from
the eastern Atlantic Coastal Plain to the Appalachian
Plateau. Altitude varies from sea level to 3,306 ft.
There are substantial differences in climate across
the state and within microclimates, such as the rain
shadows of western mountains and local effects of
ocean breezes. Although the global climate models
used in this assessment are too coarse in spatial
resolution to reveal all of the patterns of change that
may be realized, it should not be forgotten that these
changes are superimposed on the substantial crossstate and local differences that already exist.
At Hancock, Maryland, the State narrows to
less than two miles from its northern boundary
with Pennsylvania to its southern boundary with
West Virginia and, even at its widest, Maryland
is a relatively narrow slice of the eastern United
States. The modest area of the State belies the fact
that it crosses the full range of physiographic and
climatic regimes of the Mid-Atlantic region and is
therefore exceptionally diverse with respect to its
area. Its small area also means that the species that
may take the places of those unable to compete in a
changed climate, including pest species, depend on
the conditions in bordering states. Thus, Maryland
cannot be separated from its context in a continuum
of physiography, climate, geology, soils, and biota
extending from Maine to Georgia.

Maryland’s agricultural commodities account
for less than one percent of the value of all U.S.
commodities, yet agriculture plays an important role
in the economy, social fabric, and landscape diversity
of the State. Despite the decline in agricultural
lands as a result of urbanization,
fully one-third of Maryland’s
Greenhouses
land remains in agricultural land
uses. The production of poultry and nurseries
(broilers, turkeys, and eggs) are second only
accounts for 36% of the $1.6 to broilers in
billion 2006 value of agricultural agricultural value
commodities, and the corn and
soybeans largely grown to feed
these birds represents another 17% (Figure 6.1).61
Horticulture (greenhouse/nursery) accounts for
22% of the value of Maryland’s agricultural output,
reflecting the State’s high population density and
demand for landscaping and plants.

Crop production

2006 Value of Maryland’s Agricultural Commodities
($ Millions)

265
535

82
86
121
153

355

broilers
greenhouse/nursery
dairy products
corn
soybeans
cattle
other

Figure 6.1. The value of Maryland’s agricultural commodities in
2006.61

Ben Fertig

section 6: farms & forests • 41

A Maryland farm surrounded by forest.

on the crop’s temperature requirements. Plants that
have an optimum range at cooler temperatures
will exhibit significant decreases in yield as the
temperature increases above this range. On its
own, the projected increase in mean temperature
of 2 to 3°F by 2040-2050 could decrease corn and
wheat yields by 8-14% 62, but may have little effect
on soybean yield.63 Under the higher emission
scenario, toward the end of the century, summer
heat stress is likely to be a significant limiting factor
in crop production unless
there is a transition to new
Heat stress likely to
crops or varieties, which may
limit crops under
be an expensive proposition
higher emissions
for farmers.
scenario
Crop development and
yield are also affected by the
amount of water available in the soil, which is itself
affected by elevated temperature. Furthermore,
because evapotranspiration increases with
temperature, maintaining soil moisture sufficient
for germination, growth, and grain setting will be
a significant factor in determining the response
of crop production to climate change. Despite the
mean projection of increased annual precipitation
by the climate models, moderate declines in soil
moisture are likely to be experienced in summer
and fall during the second half of the century
under both lower and higher emissions scenarios.
Furthermore, rain is likely to be delivered in more

intense events, separated by weeks to months with
less rain. One has only to recall 2007, a year with
relatively high winter and early spring precipitation
and a disastrous, weeks-long summer drought as
an example of what might occur more frequently.
Under these conditions, farmers are likely to increase
the use of irrigation—currently, just over 5% of
Maryland’s crop lands are irrigated—compounding
the aquifer drawdown already taking place in some
parts of the state (Section 5).
Plant growth is also dependent on the availability
of the carbon dioxide required for photosynthesis.
Plants respond differently to elevated carbon
dioxide concentrations. Cold-season and broadleaved weeds and cold-season grain crops, including
wheat and barley, respond most dramatically to
increased carbon dioxide. An increase of carbon
dioxide concentrations to 550 ppm could increase
the yield of these plants by 10-20%5, mainly through
increased grain production rather than grain size.
Corn and many summer weed grasses respond
less dramatically to carbon dioxide enrichment,
with corn yields increasing less than 10% given the
same increase in carbon dioxide.64 However, high
temperature stress during reproductive stages can
negate the overall carbon dioxide effects on yield
even though total plant biomass may increase and
attaining even these modest productivity increases
requires more fertilizer, unrestricted root growth,
and effective control of weeds, insects and disease.7

42  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
to lead to declines in crop production during the
second half of the century.
Crop production is affected by competition
with weeds. Because the geographic range of many
weed species is determined by temperature, climate
warming is very likely to lead to a northern shift in the
distribution of some economically significant weed
species.68 These include witchweed, cogongrass, and
itchgrass that at present are found south of Maryland
and the proliferation of invasive kudzu that is
already here.7 On the other
hand, some current weed
Weeds thrive under high
species may become less of
a problem. On-going studies temperature and CO2
in Maryland are showing that
weeds grow much faster under higher temperatures
and carbon dioxide concentrations likely to be
experienced in the next 30 to 50 years—these
conditions simulated by experiments conducted
in Baltimore.69 The growth of many weed species
is stimulated more by carbon dioxide enrichment
than are the cash crops they invade, presenting an
additional challenge for weed control.69
Beneficial and harmful insects, microbes, and
other organisms present in agricultural ecosystems
will also respond to climate change. Numerous
studies have shown changes in spring arrival, overwintering, and/or geographic range of several insect
and animal species due to climate change.5 Diseases
caused by leaf and root pathogens may increase in
Maryland if increases in humidity and frequency of
heavy rainfall events occur, but will decrease if more
frequent droughts occur.

Animal production

For optimum production, livestock require
temperatures that do not significantly alter their
behavioral or physiological functions needed to

Baltimore Sun

Under the higher and lower emissions scenarios,
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations would
increase late in the century to 940 ppm and 550
ppm, respectively. By mid-century, a modest 5 to
9% increase in crop yield, except for corn, might be
experienced as a result of fertilization.65 However,
under the higher emissions scenario, this effect
would diminish as concentrations exceed 600-800
ppm. Deficiencies in soil moisture could further
limit yield and require increased irrigation.
While carbon dioxide enrichment can stimulate
the production of leafy vegetables such as lettuce,
spinach, or radish, their greater leaf area increases
their water requirement during the warmest and
driest part of the growing season. Some moderation
of this effect may be caused by a decrease in
plant evapotranspiration as the stomata on the
leaves constrict under higher carbon dioxide
concentrations, leading to a reduction in water loss
and increase in crop yield. This effect, however, is
very likely to be small in comparison to the effects
of temperature and carbon dioxide fertilization.
Wheat and barley grain and potato tubers
contain 10 to 15% less protein when grown under
carbon dioxide concentrations of 540 to 958 ppm,
diminishing their nutritional value and performance
in food processing, for example, producing sufficient
gluten for making bread).66 This effect can be
counteracted by providing the plants more nitrogen,
but in Maryland that would require more fertilizer,
compounding the nutrient pollution problem in the
Chesapeake Bay (see Section 8).
Ground level ozone is created on warm days by
the reaction of sunlight with nitrogen oxides (NOx)
and volatile organic carbon (VOC) compounds,
present because of air pollution. Despite efforts to
reduce this pollution, Maryland experiences some
of the highest ozone in the country. As discussed
in more depth in Section 8, warmer temperatures
from global warming threatens to increase the
concentrations of ground-level ozone and the
frequency of high-ozone events. In addition to its
effects on human health, ozone is toxic to many
plants and particularly to crops such as soybean
and wheat. Even mild chronic exposure (40-60
ppb) decreases yield in soybean.67 However, these
effects may be moderated by the reduction in the
apertures of plant stomata under elevated carbon
dioxide. While the net effects on crop production
may be relatively small during the first half of this
century, if the pollutant loads of NOx and VOC are
not substantially reduced, the added stress of ozone
together with heat stress and desiccation are likely

An increase in droughts may reduce reservoir water levels.

section 6: farms & forests • 43
maintain a relatively constant body temperature. As
their core body temperatures move outside normal
boundaries, animals must begin to conserve or
dissipate heat. This reduces the energy available
for growth or the production of products such as
milk, and ultimately affects
Heat stress could affect reproduction. The onset of
heat stress often results in
milk production late in declines in physical activity
the century
and eating or grazing.
Hormonal changes, triggered
by environmental stress, result in changes in cardiac
output, blood flow to extremities, and digestion
rates.70 Adverse environmental stress can elicit a
panting or shivering response, which increases
the baseline energy requirements of the animal
and contributes to decreases in productivity. The
temperature thresholds of these responses depend
on the species in question and the animal’s genetics,
temperment, and health.
The most important forms of animal production
in Maryland are poultry (broilers), comprising
36% of all agricultural cash receipts, and dairy
production, comprising over 11% (Figure 6.1). There
are no quantitative assessments of the impacts of
climate change on poultry production in this State,
however housing large numbers of birds with a
high metabolism in close quarters already makes
them susceptible to heat stress during hot summers,
when large numbers of birds can die. To reduce
the chance of death requires costly insulation and
ventilation of growing sheds. The temperature
projections after mid-century, particularly under
the higher emissions scenario, will pose a much
more serious problem of heat stress on confined
poultry production.
The Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment
projected little increase in heat stress on dairy cattle

and no significant heat-related reductions in milk
production for the next several decades. However,
under a higher emissions scenario generally similar
to the one used here, by mid-century New Jersey
and southern Pennsylvania were projected to
experience moderate heat stress in July and declines
of milk production of up to 12%. By late century, the
declines are projected to be 10% under the lower
emissions scenario and 15-20% under the higher
emissions scenario. Similar or greater declines in
dairy production are likely in Maryland.
To maintain levels of production under climate
change, livestock producers will select breeds that
are genetically adapted to the new, warmer climate.
However, breeds that are more heat tolerant are
generally less productive.
Climate change is also likely to affect the
parasites, pathogens, and disease vectors that
affect domesticated animals. Similar effects on
pest migration and over-wintering as discussed for
cropping systems are likely to be observed for some
livestock parasites and pathogens. Also, accelerated
development of pathogens and parasites due to the
earlier spring and warmer winters is likely.
Warming and associated variation in weather
patterns will likely result in more livestock being
managed in climate-controlled facilities, even in
a more energy-constrained world. Furthermore,
agriculture, in general, and the animal production
industry, in particular, will surely be under pressure
to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions, particularly
of methane and nitrous oxide.71 This could incur
additional costs to production, thereby affecting
profitability and hence the nature of the agricultural
industry in Maryland.

Summary of impacts on agriculture

Tom Hollyman

www.cornucopia.org

In summary, agriculture in mid-latitude regions

Increased temperatures can cause heat stress in chickens.

Heat stress can cause a decline in milk production.

44  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Although Maryland accounts for only 0.3% of
the nation’s softwood production and 1.6% of its
hardwood production, the forest products industry
is economically important in parts of the State,
resulting in product output worth $262 million.
Paper products account for 60% of that total. Forest
products industries employed 9,326 in 2006 and
generated $0.4 million in State tax receipts.

likelihood of summer-fall drought could obviate
gains in forest productivity due to global warming
earlier in the century. If forest species, such as
loblolly pine, currently found farther south, migrate
into Maryland or are planted and replace existing
species, this could at least partially compensate for
some of the lost productivity
Large departures from typical conditions and
extreme events, such as late frosts, drought, and wind
storms, can damage or kill trees. The occurrence
and severity of such extreme events associated with
climate change are projected to increase. These
indirect effects of climate on
factors such as wildfires and Modest increase in
insect outbreaks are likely forest yields likely early
to contribute to reduction
in the century
of forest production. The
interaction of climate change
and these factors could create unprecedented
conditions, the effects of which are very difficult to
predict. Forests can take decades to re-establish after
disturbances are caused by fire, insect outbreaks,
and wind and ice storms. These effects are likely
to become more important than the direct effects
of climate itself in shaping future forest ecosystem
structure and functioning. All of these changes will
be influenced by the legacy of the logging in the
19th and 20th centuries and the more recent period
of fire suppression that has led to dominance by an
even-aged community of trees now reaching old
age.

Climate change and forest productivity

Carbon dioxide fertilization

Forests

Forest productivity in the United States has generally
been increasing slightly since the middle of the
20th century72, although there is no assessment
specifically for Maryland forests. Forested area
has increased dramatically from a minimum at
the beginning of the 20th century as areas of the
eastern U.S. that had been cleared for agriculture
and other purposes have been reclaimed by forests.
The potential causes of the increase in productivity
include increases in temperature, atmospheric
carbon dioxide and nitrogen deposition, but these
are difficult to isolate. Temperature, water, and
solar radiation are the primary climatic factors that
affect forest productivity. Increased precipitation,
higher temperature, and a longer growing season
will increase productivity where those factors are
currently limiting. Consequently, a modest increase
in forest yields and regrowth is likely. During the
latter part of the century under the higher emissions
scenario, however, heat stress and the greater

As discussed under agriculture, the projected
increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentration are likely to increase forest growth
due to a fertilization effect, but this will depend
greatly on the type of forest and its environmental

NPS

such as Maryland may experience moderate
warming benefits in the form of crop and pasture
yields under moderate increases in temperature (25°F) and increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide
and rainfall. However, increased risks of drought
in summer and early fall and unknown changes in
weed and pest damages will generate uncertainty
among farmers and animal producers regarding
adaptation to climate change. The warming in the
lower emissions scenario during the latter part
of this century is projected to have increasingly
negative impacts as it approaches or passes the upper
end of optimum ranges of different crop and animal
species if the higher emissions scenario proves more
accurate (Figure 4.3). Therefore, without mitigation
of greenhouse gas emissions, the changing climate
is likely to pose serious problems for Maryland
agriculture resulting from heat stress and summerfall drought that might increase groundwater
demand for crop irrigation.

Fall colors illuminate a mountain forest.

section 6: farms & forests • 45
conditions. The response of tree growth to elevated
CO2 also depends on the age of the trees; younger
trees respond more strongly than older ones.5
Maryland forests will likely absorb more CO2 and
retain more carbon in wood and soils as atmospheric
CO2 increases, but this will depend on the specifics
of how climate changes and on such factors as the
age of the forest and the degree of fertilization
by nitrogen deposition. These factors are highly
relevant when devising strategies to increase forest
carbon sequestration for mitigation plans.

nitrogen deposition on forests can have the result
of stimulating the degradation of organic matter
in soils by microbes, thus reducing any carbon
sequestration resulting from faster growth in a
CO2-enriched world.

Insect outbreaks

Outbreaks of forest insects and diseases affect
forest composition and production, leading to
altered cycles of matter and energy, and changes
in biodiversity and ecosystem services. Damage to
Maryland forests caused by outbreaks of defoliating
insects and other pests cost several million dollars
per year.75 Weather plays an important role in
influencing outbreaks of serious forest insect pests,
including the gypsy moth, southern pine beetle,
hemlock woolly adelgid, spruce budworm, and
western spruce budworm. Temperature affects
the rate of insect life-cycle development rates, the
synchronization of mass attacks that overcome tree
defenses, and insect winter mortality rates. Climate
also affects the insects indirectly through effects
on the host trees. Drought stress, resulting from
decreased precipitation and warming, reduces the
trees’ ability to resist insect attack.
Outbreaks and expansion of some non-native
insect species, such as the hemlock woolly adelgid
(Box 6.1), are known to be influenced by climate.
The introduced gypsy moth has defoliated millions
of acres of Maryland forests. Projections indicate
that Maryland’s changing climate is likely to increase
the frequency and severity of gypsy moth outbreaks
in the future.76 Longer growing seasons and higher
carbon dioxide concentrations might allow forests
to recover more quickly after such disturbances.
But defoliation disturbances affect carbon uptake,
nutrient cycling, and stream hydrology, resulting in
the loss of nitrogen from the forest where it is needed,
to the Chesapeake Bay where it is harmful.77

Atmospheric pollution

Industrial emissions.

NPS

Joanna Woerner

Forest growth and dynamics are affected by air
pollution in two important ways: the toxic effects
of ozone created by emissions of NOx and VOCs
from power plants and vehicles, and the stimulatory
effects of nitrogen deposited as a result of these NOx
emissions. Nitrogen deposition in the eastern U.S.
can exceed 10 kg of nitrogen per hectare (or 9 lbs
per acre) per year and has increased 10 to 20 times
above pre-industrial levels.73 Although nitrogen
deposition has declined recently in Maryland as
result of air pollution controls74, future emissions are
uncertain. Forests are generally limited by nitrogen
availability and increased
Combined effects of
deposition will enhance
temperature, ozone,
forest growth. However,
CO2, and nitrogen
if it increases too much, it
deposition are difficult can have negative effects
on forests and on aquatic
to predict
ecosystems that receive
runoff from the forests. The interactions of
elevated CO2, temperature, precipitation, ozone
pollution, and nitrogen deposition are likely to be
important in determining forest growth and species
composition, but the net result of these factors and
their interactions is poorly understood. Continued

Hemlock forest, ravaged by insect pests.

46  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

box 6.1 the eastern hemlock & woolly adelgid

Species composition

temperatures and the capacity of the adelgid
to develop greater resistance to cold shock
indicates that more hemlock forests will
succumb in future years.

Box Figure 6.1. Expansion of the range of the hemlock
woolly adelgid (Adelges tsuagae) with regard to the
range of the eastern hemlock.59

www.duke.edu

The hemlock woolly adelgid, an aphid-like
insect native to Asia, was first recorded in
1951 in Virginia, and has since spread, causing
a severe decline in vitality and survival of
eastern hemlock in North American forests
(Box Figure 6.1). Once it arrives at a site,
complete hemlock mortality is just a matter
of time and damaged hemlock stands are
replaced by black birch, black oaks, and other
hardwoods. While plant biodiversity increases
in the canopy and understory, several bird
species, including the blue-headed vireo and
Blackburnian warbler, have a high affinity for
hemlock forests and are at risk as a result of
adelgid expansion. Also, changes in the forest
canopy affect hydrology and nutrient cycling,
resulting in longer periods of dry streams,
which, in turn, reduce the abundance of brook
trout, brown trout and other fish. Low winter
temperatures presently check the spread of
the hemlock woolly adelgid, but increasing

As the changing climate after the last Ice Age
resulted in the northward shift in the distribution
of tree species in eastern North America, 21st
century warming will very likely result in the
northward sift in the range of trees and forest types
currently that exists in Maryland. Trees that need
cold winter conditions (for example, sugar maples)
or are susceptible to diseases or pests under warmer

conditions will retreat northward, possibly replaced
by species currently found south of Maryland.
Plant hardiness zones for horticultural plants have
recently been revised to take account of the changes
in the potential ranges of garden plants that have
already taken place (Figure 6.2).
By relating the preferred environmental
conditions of various forest types to current
temperature and precipitation, it has been possible

1990

2006

Zone

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 6.2. U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones for 1990 compared to those delimited by the National Arbor Day
Foundation’s for 2006.

section 6: farms & forests • 47

Forest ecosystems

Forests provide many other benefits beyond
the lumber and fiber. These ecosystem services,
including watershed protection, water quality, flow
regulation, wildlife habitat and diversity, climate
regulation, carbon storage, air quality, recreational
opportunities, and aesthetic fulfillment, are
important for the well-being of Marylanders. The
market values of few of these ecosystem services have
been quantified, but they are nonetheless essential
and irreplaceable. All of these services are subject
to the direct and indirect effects of climate change
as forest productivity and composition changes and
disturbance by heat stress, seasonal drought, severe
storms, fire, disease, and pest outbreaks increase.
The biodiversity of forest plants, animals, and
microbes is also likely to be affected in ways that are
difficult to predict let alone quantify.78 Biodiversity
is already being affected at the landscape, species,
and genetic levels by a variety of human activities,
including habitat loss and fragmentation, invasive
species, and air pollution.79 Climate change poses yet
another stress that is likely to reduce biodiversity.80
Climate changes have been shown to affect
the timing of critical processes of growth and

reproduction (for example, flowering and fruiting)
in thousands of plant and animal species around
the world.5,81 These changes can disrupt previously
synchronized relationships among species (for
example, pollination, prey availability for predators,
and food sources for migrant birds). The reduction in
population sizes caused by these adverse effects sets
the stage for local or global extinctions of species.82
The American Bird Conservancy estimated that
habitat alterations due to climate change may force
out 34 or more bird species from Maryland.
The most emblematic of birds that may no longer
breed in Maryland because of the unsuitability of
habitats is the state bird, the Baltimore oriole. The
NECIA also projected that various migratory bird
species with northerly or high altitude distributions,
including the American goldfinch, purple finch,
rose-breasted grosbeak, and black-capped chickadee
would experience declines in abundance in the
Northeast, while the tufted titmouse, northern
cardinal, and indigo bunting have the potential to
increase in both range and incidence.7

Summary of impacts on forests

Maryland forests are likely to experience a modest
increase in productivity over the first half of the
century as a result of longer growing seasons and
elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations.
Later in the century, the composition of Maryland
forests is likely to undergo pronounced changes as
the maple-beech-birch forests of Western Maryland
begin to disappear and pine trees become more
prominent in oak-hickory forests of central
Maryland. Also, later in the century, heat stress,
seasonal droughts, and outbreaks of pests and
diseases are likely to diminish forest productivity,

University of Texas

to estimate future ranges as climate changes in
eastern North America.55 Under a doubling of CO2
concentrations—likely to be experienced in the
latter half of the century under the low-emissions
scenario—the maple-beech-birch forests of Allegany
and Garrett counties are likely to disappear, replaced
by oak-hickory forests. The oak-hickory forest type
that presently characterizes most of the Piedmont
and Coastal Plain west of the Chesapeake is likely to
transition to an oak-pine forest.
The NECIA concluded that the region’s species
would shift northward by as much as 350 miles by
the late-century under the lower emissions scenario,
and as much as 500 miles
under its higher emissions
Maple-beech-birch
scenario.
The
NECIA
forests are likely to
projected that the maplebe eliminated from
beech-birch forests that
Western Maryland
presently characterize most
of Pennsylvania would move
to northern Pennsylvania, and thus out of Western
Maryland, under the lower emissions scenario
and retreat to Upstate New York under its higher
emissions scenario. In general, then, one would
expect that by late-century, Maryland forests would
look much like those in eastern Virginia and North
Carolina do today, with many more pines.

Maryland’s state bird, the Baltimore oriole.

48  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
which and rate at which other tree species from
the south would replace the current species and
the services the present forests provide cannot be
readily predicted.

NPS

particularly under the higher-emissions scenario.
This could result in impairment of important
ecosystem services that forests provide, including
carbon sequestration, control of the water cycle,
and maintenance of biodiversity. The extent to

Maryland forests provide many resources as well as recreational opportunities.

section 7: coastal vulnerability from sea-level rise & storms • 49

coastal vulnerability from sea-level rise & storms

Section 7

key points
 Sea level in Maryland rose by 1 foot in the 20th century, partially because the land is
sinking.

Coastal regions of Maryland have been sinking at about a rate of 6 inches per century and this should continue.
Additionally, the average level of the sea in this region rose by about the same amount. As a result, Maryland has
experienced considerable shoreline erosion and deterioration of coastal wetlands.

 Sea-level rise is very likely to accelerate, inundating hundreds of square miles of wetlands
and land.

Projections, that include accelerating melting of ice, extend to more than 1 foot by mid-century and 3 feet by late
century. If the highest rates are realized under the higher emissions scenario, most tidal wetlands would be lost,
about 200 square miles of land would be inundated, and an even greater sea-level rise would occur in subsequent
centuries.

 Rains and winds from hurricanes are likely to increase, but their frequency cannot be
predicted.

The destructive potential of Atlantic tropical storms and hurricanes has increased since 1970 in association with
warming sea surface temperatures. This trend is likely to continue as ocean waters warm. Whether Maryland will be
confronted with more frequent or powerful storms depends on storm tracks that cannot yet be predicted.

M

ention effects of
climate
change
in
Maryland
and most people would
think first of the threat of
coastal inundation due to
sea-level rise and the increased
risks of storm damage. The record
storm surge flooding associated with the passage
of Hurricane Isabel in 2003 is still fresh in the
minds of Marylanders. With its 3,100 miles of tidal
shoreline and extensive low-lying lands, especially
on the Eastern Shore, Maryland’s coastal zone is
particularly vulnerable to climate change. Indeed,
the central charge to the Adaptation and Response
Working Group of the Commission on Climate
Change is to “recommend strategies for reducing
the vulnerability of the State’s coastal, natural, and
cultural resources and communities to the impacts
of climate change, with an initial focus on sea-level
rise and coastal hazards (e.g., shore erosion, coastal
flooding).” The Commission is thus tasked with
developing appropriate guidance to assist the State
and local governments with identifying specific
measures (e.g., local land use regulations and

ordinances) to adapt to sea-level rise and increasing
coastal hazards.
This section explores what we know about sealevel rise in Maryland and the Chesapeake Bay
region, and applies the latest models and scientific
results that provide insights into the sea-level rise
that may be experienced during the present century
and beyond. Projections are made for the higher
and lower emission scenarios as has been done for
temperature and precipitation in Section 3. The
section further explores current scientific knowledge
of the likely consequences of global warming for
extratropical storms, such as Nor’easters, and the
tropical cyclones that we know as hurricanes.
The potential impacts on tidal wetlands, coastal
lands and development, and storm surges are then
evaluated.

Seas Rising or Land Sinking?
As mentioned in Section 1, sea level rose rapidly
as glaciers melted after the peak of the last Ice Age
20,000 years ago. At that time, the Atlantic shoreline
was near the edge of the continental shelf, more than
80 miles off Ocean City, and the rivers ran across

50 • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
the present shelf to the sea. By 8,000 years ago, sea
level had risen to the point of flooding the lower
Susquehanna River valley, creating a tidal estuary,
the nascent Chesapeake Bay (Figure 7.1).83 The rate
of sea-level rise during this period of rapid melting
of glaciers was about 16 mm/year. (Throughout this
discussion, metric units are used for annual rates
to facilitate presentation and calculation, but rates
over longer periods are converted to feet for ease
in comprehension.) By 5,000 years ago, the rise of
the ocean virtually ceased, but the Bay continued to
deepen and expand, filling the lower valleys of the
Potomac, Patuxent, Patapsco, Choptank, and other
rivers. This was because the land was sinking as the
bulging of the Earth’s surface, resulting from the
tremendous burden on the crust by the very thick
8000 years ago

5000 years ago

glaciers that occupied what is now Hudson Bay
and Quebec, subsided. This rate of subsidence was
relatively rapid initially, but continues to this day as
a slow-motion rebounding of an event that peaked
20,000 years ago.
Because different coastlines around the world are
sinking at different rates—or actively rising in some
previously glaciated or geologically active regions
—sea-level rise experienced at specific places will
differ, even with a comparable rising of the level
of the ocean itself. It is, then, appropriate to refer
to “relative sea-level rise”—the water level relative
to the land at that place. This is typically estimated
by tide gauges that have long
been fixed in place. The tide Sea level at Baltimore
gauge record for Baltimore, rose by 1 foot during
which is one of the nation’s the 20th century,
longest, shows that the water
mostly since 1930
levels there are highly variable
as a result of weather events,
strong seasonal variations, and longer oscillations
in the North Atlantic Basin. On the average,
however, relative sea level increased approximately
one foot over the 20th century (Figure 7.2). Note,
however, that for the first 30 years of the record
the rate of relative sea-level rise was slower, with a
disproportionate part of the rise in the mean level
coming since 1930.
Analysis of many such tide gauge records from
around the world, including those from more
geologically stable locations, allowed the IPCC to
conclude that the global mean sea-level rise, once
the effects of land subsidence or emergence are
removed, was approximately 1.8 mm/year between
1961 and 1993.2 Relative sea level at Baltimore rose
at a rate of about 3.5 mm/year, indicating the local
rate of subsidence was 1.7 mm/year or roughly
half a foot per century. The effects of regional land
subsidence on relative sea-level rise is apparent

3000 years ago
Mean sea level in Baltimore, 1903–2006

Mean sea level (ft)

23.6

22.6

  
 
 


Figure 7.1. The rising ocean began to fill river valleys 8,000 years
ago creating the general configuration of the Chesapeake Bay by
3,000 years ago.83

19
03
19
09
19
15
19
21
19
27
19
33
19
39
19
45
19
51
19
57
19
63
19
69
19
75
19
81
19
87
19
94
20
00
20
06

21.6

Year
Figure 7.2. Tide gauge record for Baltimore.

section 7: coastal vulnerability from sea-level rise & storms • 51
Relative Sea-level Rise is a Combination of Sea-level Rise and Land Subsidence

2
6

1
4

7

3
8

5

Factors Associated with:
Sea-level Rise

Land Subsidence

1

Steric (thermal) expansion of seawater
with warmer temperatures

4

Compression of surface sediment layers

2

Increasing runoff from melting continental
glaciers with warmer temperatures

5

Compression of deeper layers due to
groundwater extraction

6

Collapse of mantle forebulge with retreat of
continental glacier

Results in:
Coastal Flooding

And on longer timescales (hundreds of thousands to millions of years):

3

Increased rate of mid-ocean ridge spreading
(decreases the volume of the ocean basin)

Eastport, ME

Boston, MA

Hampton Roads, VA

Solomons Island, MD
Baltimore, MD
Philadelphia, PA
New York, NY

Charleston, SC

Wilmington, NC

Miami Beach, FL

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Key West, FL

Relative Sea-level Rise (mm/yr)

by comparing tide gauge observations along the
Atlantic coast (Figure 7.3).84 Glaciated areas to
the north experienced less relative sea-level rise
than those located in the glacial forebulge region
that are still subsiding. This subsidence (reflected
by the difference between relative sea-level rise
and the global mean) diminishes to the south of
the Chesapeake Bay region. Note, however, that
subsidence rates vary within the Bay region, with

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

extent of glaciers

38

40

42

44

Regional subsidence of a tectonic plate

8

Depression of the continental margin by
weight of sediment and seawater

Hampton Roads (Norfolk) experiencing a relative
sea-level rise of 4.2 mm/year. This is likely the result
of groundwater extraction from permeable rock or
sediments, which can cause localized subsidence
of the ground surface. Similar localized areas of
greater subsidence resulting from large groundwater
withdrawal may exist around Solomons and
Cambridge, Maryland. However, for the Chesapeake
Bay as a whole, the relative sea-level rise of about
one foot during the 20th century resulted from near
equal parts of subsidence and global sea-level rise.
And, there is no reason to expect that the regional
forebulge subsidence, which is in the process of
adjusting over thousands of years, will be different
than what was observed over the past century.

Global Sea-Level Rise

  -  -
forebuldge subsidence

7

46

Degrees North Latitude

Figure 7.3. Relative sea level rise during the later 20th century
along the U.S. Atlantic coast compared to the global mean sea
level rise during 1961-2003 (band represents the confidence limits
around the mean).2

The limited records available indicate that global
sea level, adjusted for land movements, was nearly
stable during the 19th century but began to increase
around the turn of the century and then accelerate
from the 1930s onward (Figure 7.4). Based on tide
gauge data, the mean rate of sea-level rise was
estimated by the IPCC to have been 1.8 mm/year
between 1961-2003.2 Since late 1992, there have
been satellites deployed with the capability of very

52  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
accurately measuring their altitude over the ocean’s
surface. Large numbers of measurements can be
averaged over a 10-day period to develop precise
maps of the surface of the ocean. Based on analysis
changes in the ocean’s elevation between 1993 and
2003, the IPCC noted a global average of 3.1 mm/
year (black line in Figure 7.4), although the level of
various regions of the ocean changed at different
rates. While the degree to which the differences
with sea-level rise estimates derived from tide
gauges represent methodological differences or an
actual acceleration of the rate of global sea-level rise
has not been fully resolved, such an acceleration is
consistent with the observed warming of the ocean

Future Sea-Level Rise

100

0
-50
-100
-150

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

Figure 7.4. IPCC compilation of global data since 1870 shows
acceleration of sea level rise during the 20th century.2 The blue
curve shows coastal tide gauge measurements since 1950 and
the black curve is based on satellite altimetry.
4.0
3.5

Antarctic Ice Sheet
Greenland Ice Sheet
glaciers and ice caps
thermal expansion

Sea Level Rise (mm/yr)

3.0

How much sea-level rise will Maryland experience
over the coming century in a warming climate? The
IPCC projected that global sea level would rise by 7
to 15 inches under the lower emissions (B1) scenario
and 9 to 20 inches under the higher emissions (A2)
scenario, although the IPCC specifically stated that
these projections cannot “provide a best estimate
or an upper bound for sea-level rise.”  2 Adding
to those projections the expectation that land
subsidence in coastal Maryland would continue at
the rate observed during the 20th century yields the
relative sea-level rise projections labeled as IPCC
projections in Figure 7.6. These projections suggest
that Maryland would experience a rise in sea level
ranging from just slightly more than the one foot
experienced during the past century to more than
twice that amount. However, the IPCC sea-level
rise projections have been widely criticized as too
conservative because they do not account for rapid
changes in ice flow that could be experienced.

2.5

Sea-level Rise Projections in Maryland

2.0

4

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1961-2003

1993-2003

Figure 7.5. The IPCC attempted to estimate the factors responsible
for increasing the ocean’s volume, including thermal expansion
and melting of glaciers and polar ice sheets.2 These are compared
with the global mean (dot) and range of observed sea-level rise.
These estimates come closer to explaining the higher rates of sea
level rise based on satellite observations during 1993-2003.

Sea-level Rise (ft)

Sea Level (mm)

50

-200

surface and melting of glaciers, both of which
expand the ocean’s volume (Figure 7.5).
Sea-level rise during the recent past is caused
primarily by expansion of the volume of the
warming ocean and, secondly, by the observed
melting of glaciers and ice caps. The melting of the
massive polar ice sheets on Greenland and western
Antarctica were only a small component of sea-level
rise, although the contribution of Greenland seems
to be growing. It is unlikely that the total melting of
the Greenland Ice Sheet would occur this century
and produce the kind of 25-foot inundations seen
in popular dramatizations of sea-level rise, although
this could happen sometime in the future.

3

with
accelerated
melting

2


projections

1




0

2050




2100

Figure 7.6. Projected relative sea level rise in Maryland during the
21st century under the higher and lower emissions scenarios.

section 7: coastal vulnerability from sea-level rise & storms • 53
sea level under the higher emissions (A2) scenario,
compared to the IPCC projection of 9 to 20 inches.
A word of caution, though, in that the statistical
range of possibilities extended to 47 inches in the
range of scenarios tested. Remarkably, the other two
studies produced estimates of accelerated melting
that, when added to the IPCC projections, resulted
in very similar global sea-level rise at the end of the
century under the higher emissions scenario. When
coastal Maryland subsidence rates are taken into
account, the additional relative sea-level rise based
on the assumptions of these studies is represented
in Figure 7.6 by the lighter-colored extensions above
the darker-colored boxes that represent the IPCC
projections. This suggests a sea-level increase of as
little as 0.6 feet (probably unlikely because this is
scarcely above the 20th century rate) to much as
1.3 feet could be experienced along the Maryland’s
coast by the middle of the century. By the end of
the century, accelerated melting could produce a
relative sea-level rise from 2.7 feet under the lower
emissions scenario to 3.4 feet under the higher
emissions scenario.
These adjusted estimates based on the IPCC
projections should not be considered as model
forecasts, but as reasonable bases for assessment and

Jane Thomas

The IPCC readily admitted that such effects were
excluded because these ice flow dynamics could not
reliably be modeled when its Fourth Assessment
was being prepared and cautioned that sea-level rise
could be higher as a result.
The melting of ice floating on the sea has no
effect on sea level, much as ice cubes melting in a
glass do not cause the glass to overflow. But, how
much higher could sea-level rise if losses of ice
that rests on land accelerate? This was estimated by
examining three scientific reports appearing since
the publication of the IPCC Fourth Assessment.
They projected potential 21st century sea-level rise
using three different methods.
Accelerated ice melting One used a statistical
approach relating sea-level
could result in 3 feet
rise to observed temperature
of sea-level rise if
increase85; another assumed
emissions continue to that the continuation of the
increase
rate of recently observed
acceleration of ice loss,
primarily from glaciers and ice sheets86; and a third
estimated an upper limit of ice sheet contribution
during the 21st century in projecting sea-level rise
in the state of Washington.87 The statistical model
projected a mean increase of 34 inches in global

A mature buffer zone helps reduce nutrient runoff from entering a saltmarsh on a tributary of the Chester River, Maryland.

54  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
planning that take account of the admitted high-end
uncertainties in estimating future sea levels. They
do not consider the upper bounds of the confidence
limits presented in the statistical study, but can be
used with confidence in concluding that it is likely
that Maryland will experience sea-level rise of 2 feet
by the end of the century. Further, this estimation
indicates that, at this time, there is no scientific
basis for projecting sea level rise of more than 4 feet
during this century. Of course, sea-level rise will
not stop at the end of the century and an important
difference between the higher and lower emissions
scenarios is that the higher emissions scenario is
much more likely to move global temperatures over
a threshold that would lead to the irreversible melt
down of at least the Greenland Ice sheet, that would
result, during succeeding centuries, in the 25-foot
inundation of cities depicted in some frightening
animations.

Coastal Wetlands

Jane Thomas

This section assesses the impacts of sea-level
rise on shorelines and low lying lands. Section
8 will further explore the consequences of sealevel rise on the Chesapeake Bay and Maryland’s
Coastal Bays. An important part of these coastal
ecosystems is, however, the coastal wetlands
that fringe the estuaries. Maryland has some
200,000 to 285,000 acres of coastal wetlands88 that
provide critical nursery grounds for commercially
important fisheries, important feeding grounds for
migratory waterfowl, and home to furbearers and
other wildlife. These wetlands buffer shorelines

from erosion during storms, trap sediments and
associated nutrients and pollutants, and provide
a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities,
such as sport fishing, hunting, kayaking, and birdwatching. The quantity and quality of these resources
and opportunities available for future generations
of Maryland residents will be directly affected by
climate change.
Tidal wetlands will persist only if they build
vertically through the accumulation in their soils
of mineral (sand, silt, clay) and organic (plant
material, especially plant roots) matter at a pace
equal to or greater than sea-level rise—otherwise
they will become submerged and convert to shallow
open water habitat. In addition, given the generally
shallow slopes over much of the Maryland coastal
zone, those tidal wetlands that are able to keep pace
with sea level will migrate and expand inland, but
only so long as there are no barriers to migration
(such as shore stabilization structures, houses, and
roads).
As sea level rises, the fate of coastal wetlands in
Maryland will be determined largely by how the
needed build-up of soils is impacted by natural
processes, human activities,
and the effects of the changing When sea level rises,
climate. Changes in the river tidal wetlands must
runoff and shoreline erosion
build up the soil or
would affect the mineral
sediment available for soils. migrate inland
Droughts could affect the
accumulation of organic matter. More intense storms
and greater storm surge could erode wetlands, but
also transport mineral sediments onto the wetlands

The loss of wetlands at the Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge, Maryland, is due in part to sea-level rise, erosion, and subsidence.

section 7: coastal vulnerability from sea-level rise & storms • 55

Year
2020

Year
2050

Year
2100
Figure 7.7. Projected inundation of coastal wetlands at Blackwater
National Wildlife Refuge that would result from 6 mm/year sea
level rise.92

Coastal responses to accelerated sea-level rise are
difficult to predict over an area as large as Maryland,
but a panel of wetland experts considered existing
knowledge of responses and likely climate changes
to project wetland survival for the Chesapeake Bay
and Coastal Bays during this century.93 Three relative
sea-level rise scenarios were evaluated: 3 mm/year
(approximating the current rate), 5 mm/year, and
10 mm/year. The fate of the wetlands was assigned
to one of three possible outcomes: keeping pace,
marginal (able to maintain elevation under optimal
conditions, and loss (flood to the point of loss of

Joanna Woerner

and affect accumulation of organic matter by the
negative effects of salt-water intrusion on plant
growth.
Wetland survival during sea-level rise will vary
among coastal wetlands depending on their location
and the degree to which they are able to build up
the soil surface. Marshes behind barrier islands on
the seaside Eastern Shore increase their soil level
vertically primarily as a result of sand driven over
the islands during storms. An increase of storm
intensity or frequency could build and expand
the marshes as sea levels rise. Estuarine marshes
depend more on organic matter and fine-grained
resuspended sediments to build their soils. Without
some significant source of mineral sediments such
as discharge from a river, organic soils can only
build so fast to keep up with sea level rise—beyond
some threshold, the marshes begin to deteriorate as
plants die because their roots become continuously
inundated and wetlands convert to shallow ponds.
As sea level has risen in the Chesapeake Bay,
the gradual inundation of the low lying land on
the lower Eastern Shore has led to the formation
of tidal marshes that are built atop submerged
uplands, particularly in Dorchester and Somerset
counties. Accretion rates in these marshes are
typically less than the current rate of sea-level rise.89
At the Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge, land
surface adjustments related
to shallow soil subsidence90
Coastal wetlands,
and possibly to groundwater
such as at Blackwater
withdrawal91 have locally
National Wildlife
increased the rate of relative
Refuge, are already
sea-level rise, contributing
to severe wetland loss.89 In
deteriorating
addition, the effect of local
stressors on vegetation growth, including intense
herbivory by nutria, burning of the marsh for wildlife
management, and altered flooding and salinity
patterns related to roads and other construction
activities, may be limiting soil buildup needed
to counteract sea-level rise, which contributes to
severe wetland loss.
If sea level were to rise at 6 mm/year, most of the
remaining wetlands would be converted to open
water (Figure 7.7).92 Marsh elevation is not accreting
appreciably under present rates of sea-level rise.86
Consequently, it is unlikely that these marshes
could build additional soil to keep pace without
some external sediment subsidy. The placement of
sediment dredged from channel maintenance in the
Chesapeake Bay is currently under evaluation as a
way to sustain these drowning wetlands.

Intensive development and the loss of marsh impact the health of
Maryland’s Coastal Bays.

56  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
emergent vegetation). The findings summarized
below are intended to provide a regional perspective
and should not be applied to site-specific cases:
• For the Maryland Coastal Bays: marshes are
able to keep pace with 3 mm/year of sealevel rise; at 5 mm/year, their ability to do
this would be marginal and depend on the
frequency of storms to mobilize and deliver
sediments; and, at 10 mm/year, there would
be marsh loss to shallow open water.
• For the Chesapeake Bay: estuarine marshes
on the lower Eastern Shore are already
experiencing high rates of loss and their
survival is considered marginal at 3 mm/year
and subject to substantial loss under either
of the accelerated rates; estuarine marshes
in the northern portion of Chesapeake Bay
and on the western shore are keeping pace
with 3 mm/year, but would be marginal at 5
mm/year and subject to loss at 10 mm/year;
and, tidal freshwater marshes and swamps
accumulate both mineral sediment and large
quantities of plant organic and are considered
sustainable under accelerated sea-level rise
assuming salinities do not increase and
sediment supplies are maintained.
To put these expert judgments in the context of
the sea-level rise projections under the higher and
lower emissions scenarios (Figure 7.6), based on the
IPCC projections, the rate of sea-level rise over the
first half of the century is likely to range from 3.5 to 5.8
mm/year, with the average for the higher emissions
scenario 4.7 mm/year versus 3.8 mm/year under the
lower emissions scenario. Except in tidal freshwater
environments or where there is a significant supply
of mineral sediments, the survivability of coastal
wetlands is likely to be marginal, at least under the
higher emissions scenario.
During the second half of the century, sea level is
projected to rise, based on the IPCC, by an average
of 4.8 mm/year under the lower emissions scenario
versus 5.7 mm/year under the higher emissions
scenario, however, the upper end of the range under
higher emissions is 7.8 mm/year. Consequently,
the difference in the path of global emissions of
greenhouse gases is likely to determine whether
there is marginal survivability of at least some of
Maryland’s tidal wetlands and the predominance
of wetland loss. However, with accelerated melting,
the rate of sea-level rise could exceed 10 mm/year
by the middle of the century, resulting in loss of the
substantial majority of Maryland’s 430 square miles

of tidal wetlands. While some new tidal wetlands
will be created over land that is presently dry, the
dry land and nontidal wetlands potentially available
for inland migration is only about 10% of the area of
existing tidal wetlands.94
A recently completed, parallel analysis by the
National Wildlife Federation94 also projected
losses of a majority of the brackish marshes, tidal
swamps, and estuarine beaches in the Chesapeake
Bay under a 27-inch rise in sea level by the end of
the century. Clearly, the intertidal habitats that are
important to the characteristics and productivity
of the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem are at risk as a
consequence of global warming.

Erosion & Inundation
In addition to causing the deterioration and
landward migration of coastal wetlands, projected
sea-level rise will cause the erosion and retreat
of shorelines and, ultimately, the inundation of
presently dry land. Based on general estimates
derived from the Maryland Department of Natural
Resources airborne surveys using a highly accurate
laser instrument called LIDAR (Figure 7.8), it is
roughly estimated that over 180 square miles of
land would be inundated by the end of the century
under the higher emissions scenario, assuming the
Potential Innundation on Maryland’s Eastern Shore

elevation above mean
sea level
< 0 - 2 feet
2 - 5 feet
5 - 10 feet
> 10 feet

Chesapeake
Bay

Figure 7.8. Extensive areas of wetlands and low-lying lands less than
2 feet above mean sea level (light blue) are likely to be innundated
this century. Lands with elevations between 2 and 5 feet (medium
blue) are also potentially at risk. Image based on aircraft LIDAR
mapping by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources.

section 7: coastal vulnerability from sea-level rise & storms • 57
higher sea level rise rates driven by accelerated ice
melting (Figure 7.6). If the growth of greenhouse gas
emissions is not mitigated, the inundation of land
could be more than 60% if the growth of emissions
were reversed by mid century, based on comparison
of sea-level rise projections under higher and lower
emission scenarios. The extent of inundation of dry
lands will, of course, be dependent on steps taken
to respond to rising sea level, but these estimates
reflect the amount of present
Over 180 miles of land land that will be below the
level of normal spring high
could be inundated
tides. One has to also keep in
if greenhouse gas
mind that as sea level rises,
emissions are not
the volume of the Chesapeake
Bay will increase and this will
reduced
affect the normal range of
the tides, in general, making the high tides a little
higher (see Section 8).
Most of the land subject to inundation is naturally
located in the lowest lying parts of the State, notably
along the Chesapeake Bay side of the lower Eastern
Shore in Dorchester, Wicomico, and Somerset
counties (Figure 7.8). Several islands (including
Smith Island) and necks in this region, some
inhabited, may be completely inundated or cut off
within this century. Outside of this region, parts of

Talbot, St. Mary’s, Anne Arundel, and Baltimore
counties are similarly susceptible. Assuming the
projection included accelerated melting (resulting
in sea-level rise to just over 3 feet; Figure 7.6), the
homes of thousands of Marylanders would be lost.
With a relative sea-level rise of just half that, which
should be regarded as likely within the century, 264
miles of roadway, 226 miles of rail line, and 31% of
the port facilities in Maryland would be at risk of
inundation.
In addition to inundation, of course, substantial
shoreline erosion will very likely occur, but the
distance of shoreline retreat will vary greatly by
location, depending on the land forms, soils,
exposure, structural protection, and other factors.
Even shorelines characterized by high bluffs are
susceptible to retreat due to undermining and slope
failure. The barrier islands of Maryland’s ocean
shore already experience morphological changes
through erosion and overwash. If sea-level rise
accelerated to 5 mm/year, as projected under the
higher emissions scenario sometime during the
middle of the century, it is very likely that northern
Assateague Island, south of Ocean City, would
fragment with one or more new inlets opening to
the Coastal Bays.95 This would dramatically impact
not only this National Seashore but also the Coastal
Bays, by exposure to waves and storm surge.

Adrian Jones

Stormy Weather Ahead?

Eroding Chesapeake Bay shoreline.

The relationship between climate change and storms
has received much attention after the devastation of
Hurricane Katrina in 2005, which produced record
storm surge and property loss and awakened the
nation to its vulnerability. This relationship has
been hotly debated within the scientific community,
but another U.S. Climate Change Science Program
(CCSP) synthesis report recently provided a
consensus perspective based on the latest scientific
results and analysis.13 The Atlantic tropical storm
and hurricane destructive potential increased since
1970 in association with warming Atlantic sea
surface temperatures. And, it is likely that the annual
numbers of tropical storms, hurricanes, and named
hurricanes increased over the past 100 years during
which the sea surface temperatures also increased.
Also, it is very likely that the increase of greenhouse
gases contributed to this ocean warming. The CCSP
synthesis concluded that it is likely that hurricane
rainfall and wind speeds will increase in response to
global warming, but could not predict any change
in frequency in hurricanes during this century. Two

The 2003 Hurricane Isabel makes landfall on the Mid-Atlantic.

www.wetlandswatch.org

very recent studies have actually projected a decrease
in hurricane and tropical storm frequency, but an
increase in their wind intensity and rainfall.96
There has been a northward shift in the tracks
of strong non-tropical storms, such as Nor’easters,
but evidence is inconclusive in the Atlantic to draw
conclusions about the strength of these storms. The
CCSP synthesis concluded that there are likely to
be more frequent strong non-tropical storms, with
stronger winds and more extreme wave heights.
The degree to which Maryland will be confronted
with more frequent or powerful storms depends
heavily on the storm tracks, which scientists
are not yet able to predict for future decades.
However, because of the above projections of storm
intensification and because hurricanes will be able
to travel farther north as a result of the warming
sea surface conditions, it is likely that Maryland will
experience more powerful hurricanes or tropical
storms and more powerful and frequent nontropical storms than in the 20th century. It is not
now possible, however, to quantify this increased
risk.
While more intense storms (for example, with
higher wind velocity and greater precipitation)
generally produce greater storm surge (raising of the
water level by high winds and reduced atmospheric
pressure), the storm surge experienced depends
greatly on the size, approach, and speed of the
storm. For example, Hurricane Katrina produced
much higher storm surge along the Mississippi
Gulf Coast than Hurricane Camille, which hit
more or less the same area with higher winds.
Hurricane Isabel in 2003 produced record storm
surges throughout much of the Chesapeake Bay
because its path carried it up the western side of the
Bay, with its counterclockwise winds driving water
north all the way.97 But, its storm surge was higher
by about one foot than a large storm with a similar
track that hit in the 1930s—the difference being the
relative sea-level rise that had taken place since then
(Figure 7.2). This means that assessments of future
vulnerability to storm surges must take into account
both the moving baseline of sea-level rise and the
greater potential of more intense storms.

NASA

58  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Flood damage caused by Hurricane Isabel, Benedict, Maryland.

section 8: chesapeake bay & coastal ecosystems • 59

chesapeake Bay & coastal ecosystems

Section 8

key points
 Chesapeake and Coastal Bay restoration goals will likely be more difficult to achieve.

Increased winter-spring runoff washing more nutrients into the bays, higher temperatures, and stronger density
stratification tend to exacerbate water quality impairment, alleviation of which is the prime restoration objective.
Nutrient loads would have to be reduced beyond current targets to achieve water quality requirements.

 Living resources will very likely change in species composition and abundance with
warming.

A mixture of northern, cool water species and southern, warm water species currently resides in the Chesapeake Bay.
Northern species such as soft shell clams and eelgrass are likely to be eliminated by later in the century. Southern
species are very likely to increase in abundance because of milder winters.

 As ocean water becomes more acidic, shellfish production could be affected.

Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide has already lowered pH, a trend that is very likely to continue. Recent
research indicates that the rate at which oysters and other coastal shellfish build their calcium carbonate shells will
likely be affected, but whether this would occur in Maryland waters has not been evaluated.

I

n many respects, the
Chesapeake Bay defines
Maryland, extending
through the center of the
state, providing abundant
resources, rich cultures, a port
to the world, and commanding a
major commitment for its protection
and restoration. The changing climate will have
multiple and complex effects on the Chesapeake
Bay as well as on Maryland’s Coastal Bays and the
nearshore ocean environment. Warming of water
temperatures throughout the year, earlier warming
and later cooling, changes in precipitation and
freshwater runoff, sea-level rise, and stronger winds
and tropical and non-tropical storms will affect
these coastal ecosystems and economies, including
navigation, energy, tourism, and fishing industries.
As discussed in the previous section, sea-level rise
is very likely to have major consequences for coastal
wetlands and shorelines, but will also deepen the
bays, affecting both water circulation and biota.
Climate change will complicate the effects of
nutrient pollution, the reduction of which is a
central objective of the restoration and protection
of the bays. Milder winters could lead to increased
disease and parasitism in coastal living resources
and changes in the species able to live here. Not

all effects on Maryland’s coastal ecosystems and
industries will necessarily be negative. Shorter
winters could mean longer growth seasons for blue
crabs and improved fishery yields. Reductions in
the frequency of ice formation could allow oysters
to grow along shorelines and in very shallow water,
much as they do in South and North Carolina.
The projected changes in temperature,
precipitation, droughts, and floods that would
affect coastal ecosystems during the century are
described in Section 4; the likely consequences
of global climate change on sea levels and storm
intensity are described in Section 7. It is very likely
that temperature and sea level will increase with the
limits projected in Figures 4.2 and 7.6, respectively.
For the reasons discussed in Section 4, there is less
confidence in the trends and extent of precipitation
and runoff.
Moving the Chesapeake Bay south along the
coast as depicted in Figure 4.7 is a way to put the
warming of the Bay in context. The Bay is displaced
by matching the projected future Bay summer-fall
temperatures with those presently experienced
in estuarine waters to the south.98 Warming by
2050 under either emissions scenario is likely to
change seasonal temperatures to those currently
experienced in North Carolina estuaries. The
emissions scenarios would make a big difference

60 • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
by the end of the century, however, with conditions
approximating present day southern North Carolina
under the lower emissions scenario but south
Florida under the high emissions scenario!
But, the vision of the future Chesapeake Bay
harboring shrimp and alligators should be counterbalanced with caution. Warming will likely not
geographically shift ecosystems; the Chesapeake
is not likely to be just like Pamlico Sound by the
middle of the century, harboring the exact same fish,
plants, and animals and supporting similar coastal
industries. Rather, changes in these ecosystems
cannot be fully predicted and will probably yield
novel species combinations, ecosystem adjustments,
and mixes of living resources. Differences in the
physical environment (for example, tidal range)
will continue and changes in river flows and salinity
will also affect the future ecosystems. Furthermore,
geographic barriers may exist for more southern
species to invade the Chesapeake Bay as conditions
favor their colonization and native species could
adapt to new conditions if they occur gradually.

Nutrient Pollution
Over-enrichment by human nutrient inputs, or
eutrophication, has degraded the entire Chesapeake
Bay ecosystem in pervasive ways, and reducing
nutrient pollution is the lynchpin of the Chesapeake
Bay Program. The Chesapeake 2000 Agreement
commits the Bay states and federal government to

reduce nutrient inputs in order to restore the quality
of tidal waters sufficient to remove them from
their listing as impaired, and this was determined
to require a 48% reduction of nitrogen loading
and a 53% of phosphorus
loading, derived from a 1985 Reducing nutrient
base load.99 Reversing and pollution is critical for
controlling eutrophication is
restoring Chesapeake
also a central management
objective for the Coastal and Coastal Bays
Bays.100 While nutrients
are essential for productive estuaries, excess
nutrients contribute to reduced water clarity, loss of
submerged vegetation, and low oxygen in bottom
waters during summer months (hypoxia or so-called
“dead zones”; Figure 8.1). By affecting temperature,
precipitation and runoff, sea level and winds, and
possibly nutrient loading, climate change will affect
the capacity of Maryland’s estuaries to assimilate
nutrients and recover from eutrophication.

River flows, nutrients, and hypoxia

Freshwater inflows into the Chesapeake Bay affect
salinity and circulation and, thereby, the distribution
of organisms and the functioning of the ecosystem.
Freshwater inflow typically peaks during the spring
as snow melts and precipitation increases.101 The
spring flow delivers a pulse of nutrients that, along
with light and rising temperatures, fuels a bloom
of microscopic planktonic algae, particularly
diatoms, in the upper- to mid-Bay.93 The spring

“Dead Zone”
Farming, sewage
treatment and power plants,
development, and roadways
create nutrient-laden runoff.
Excess nutrient runoff
(nitrogen, phosphorus)
goes into Bay.
Excess nutrients
stimulate
algae blooms.

Algae die off, sink to the
bottom, and decompose.
Decomposition uses up
dissolved oxygen in Bay.

Low oxygen levels, called “hypoxia”, cause shellfish to die, and
fish and crabs to leave habitat or die, creating “dead zones”.

Figure 8.1. Processes contributing to severely low dissolved oxygen levels (hypoxia) in the Chesapeake Bay.

section 8: chesapeake bay & coastal ecosystems • 61

Caroline Wicks

delivered more evenly over the winter and spring.
Warmer winter temperatures could cause an earlier
occurrence of a smaller spring bloom centered in
the upper Chesapeake Bay.
These outcomes are largely speculative and
based on understanding of recent conditions, but
illustrate the complexity of the physical, chemical,
and biological process that regulate the production
of organic matter in the nutrient-enriched
Chesapeake Bay. Of course, these processes will
also be subject to change as the climate changes.
Temperature increases affect the production of
phytoplankton biomass and the grazing of this

An excess of nutrients can lead to large algal blooms that cover
shorelines.

Jane Hawkey

phytoplankton bloom, maintained by the nutrient
input and sufficient mixing of the water column, is
largely not consumed by zooplankton. Most of the
biomass produced sinks to the bottom where it is
eventually decomposed by bacteria as temperatures
warm toward the summer. The respiration of
bacteria consumes dissolved oxygen, which is not
replenished by mixing because the bottom water is
cooler and saltier, and therefore denser. This density
stratification prevents reoxygenation of bottom
waters, but when mixing events occur, the nutrients
released by microbial decomposition stimulates
more algal blooms, thus continuing a vicious cycle
that maintains hypoxic (low oxygen) or anoxic (no
oxygen) conditions.
Climate models project increasing winter
temperatures (by an average of 4 and 7ºF for lower
and higher emissions scenarios, respectively;
Figure 4.2) and rainfall (by
about 10-13% under either
Dead zones are likely
to expand with higher scenario; Figure 4.8) over
the century for Maryland.
temperatures and
On the other hand, warming
precipitation
over the Susquehanna River
Basin is very likely to reduce
the storage of water in the form of snow in the
watershed7 and therefore even out the inflows to the
Bay during the winter-summer period. A reduction
in the peak spring inflows could result in a reduced
spring phytoplankton bloom as nutrients would be

Stormwater runoff from roads and parking lots enter Maryland waterways.

62  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
biomass by zooplankton.102 A reduction in winterspring phytoplankton biomass has been observed in
Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island, during unusually
warm winters.103 In particular, and potentially quite
significantly, if relative sea level were to increase by
as much as 3 feet, as considered in Section 7, the
volume of the Chesapeake Bay would increase by
about 14%, shifting the salinity gradient, changing
physical processes resulting from mixing of fresh
and ocean water, and increasing the volume of
bottom waters susceptible to hypoxia.
In spite of this complexity, climate change is
likely to exacerbate hypoxia. Warmer waters can
hold less oxygen to begin with, delivery of nutrients
from the watershed would increase with increased
precipitation and runoff, and salinity decreases
and temperature increases may increase density
stratification between surface and bottom waters.
Considering these facts, it is more likely than not
that hypoxia will worsen as a result of 21st century
climate change unless greater reductions in nutrient
loading are achieved and sustained. 104,105

Harmful algal blooms

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are a growing
problem affecting aquatic ecosystems worldwide,
including the Chesapeake Bay.106 These blooms
yield high densities of algae that negatively affect
other organisms or produce toxins harmful to
animals.107 Humans may be affected by HAB toxins
either through direct exposure or by consumption of
seafood containing the toxins. The Chesapeake Bay
and the Coastal Bays are home to several potential
HAB-forming species, including dinoflagellates
(e.g., Pfiesteria piscicida, Prorocentrum minimum,
Karlodinium micrum), a raphidophyte (Heterosigma
akashiwo) and a cyanobacterium (Microcystis
aeruginosa).108 HABs are commonly associated

with nutrient over-enrichment, although many
other factors affect their occurrence and prevalence.
Some species of harmful dinoflagellates, such as
Prorocentrum, and cyanobacteria (blue green algae)
seem to be favored and grow faster under high
temperature.109
Climate change is very likely to produce
warm surface water temperatures and prolonged
density stratification between surface and bottom
waters conditions that favor
dinoflagellate
and
blue
Effects on harmful algal
green algal species, some of
which are HAB-forming. blooms are difficult to
But without more specific predict
evidence and consideration
of other moderating effects, such as predators and
competitors, it is not possible to conclude that HABs
will increase as a result of warmer temperatures
alone. Nutrient inputs will remain the key factor in
controlling algal blooms in the warmer bays.

Habitat squeeze

The high oxygen requirements for respiration under
high temperatures and expansive dead zones act to
reduce the habitats that can be used by fish such as
striped bass, or rockfish as they are locally known.
These factors may co-occur to the point of acute
stress and fish kills, which already occur with some
frequency in the Chesapeake Bay and in poorly
flushed tidal creeks and canals in the Coastal Bays.
Alternatively, the fish might swim away to avoid
the stressful conditions in what might otherwise be
preferred habitats. This can lead to increased risk
of predation and capture by fishers or to increased
competition within the reduced, remaining habitat
(Figure 8.2). The high densities of fish in the few
Squeeze Zone for Striped Bass

unsuitable
temperature
“Squeeze
Zone”

www.severnriverkeeper.org

low oxygen
levels

Weems Creek fish kill due to low dissolved oxygen, June 2007.

Figure 8.2. Climate change could compress the habitats suitable
for striped bass by increasing surface water temperature to
physiologically stressful levels and expanding the volume of
bottom waters experiencing hypoxia or anoxia.

section 8: chesapeake bay & coastal ecosystems • 63
remaining suitable areas can also increase the risk
of disease and parasitic infection or infestation,
contributing additional stress to a fish that is already
behaving, feeding and growing below par. Habitat
squeezes in the Chesapeake Bay due to the degraded
water quality and warming temperatures since 1950
may have already contributed to local extinctions
of sturgeons, which are among the least tolerant
Chesapeake Bay species to hypoxic summertime
conditions.

Management implications

Estuarine Sediments
The sediment that lines both the shoreline and the
bottom of Chesapeake Bay and the Coastal Bays
also shapes the varied habitats of its productive
ecosystem. If this sediment remains on the shore
or on the bottom and if inflowing rivers run clear,
then the clarity and productivity of the Bay’s waters
are only limited by the nutrient supply and perhaps
the stratification. However, if sediment is stirred
into these waters, by waves, currents, and their
associated turbulence, or delivered by muddy rivers,
then it may deprive submerged vegetation of needed
light, deprive oysters their ability to sustain viable
reefs in the face of siltation, and alter the foraging
or predation of animals dependent on visual cues.
Because a portion of the bottom sediment is easily
erodible, estuarine circulation creates a zone of
maximum turbidity near the head of Chesapeake
Bay.110 Although this turbidity maximum is confined
to a limited reach of the estuary, it constitutes an
ecosystem crucial to early life stages of important
fisheries.111
Over geological time, estuaries are ephemeral

Jane Thomas

Although still far from reaching the restoration goals
for the Chesapeake Bay, considerable reduction of
nitrogen and phosphorus loads to the Bay has been
accomplished though large
public investments in waste
Greater reductions in
nutrient loads may be treatment facilities and land
management practices to
required to achieve
reduce the runoff of nutrients.
restoration goals
In addition to effects that
climate change might have
on hypoxia, harmful algal blooms, and habitat
suitability, it could affect agricultural practices and
forest health, and increase the frequency of flooding
in ways that deliver more nutrients to the estuaries
and worsen the symptoms of eutrophication as well
as cause additional challenges in those sectors. If this

happens, nutrient loads would have to be reduced
beyond current targets in order to meet the water
quality need to restore living resources.

A plume of sediment, possibly from an adjacent construction site, fills a river.

Hurricane Agnes rainfall accumulations.

enables long fetches that allow efficient transfer of
wind forces that drive these larger surges; these
surges enhance the natural two-day oscillation of
water level in the Bay.
As discussed in Section 7, global climate is very
likely to accelerate sea-level rise and thus the
erosion and inundation wetlands and low-lying
lands. Erosion, as the shoreline retreats inland, will
disperse sediment into the Chesapeake Bay and
Coastal Bays, further contributing to the excess
turbidity that limits light penetration. Stronger
hurricanes and non-tropical storms, which are
likely in this warming era, will increase the probably
of sustained heavy downpours such as experienced
during Hurricane Agnes. Such large storms that are
accompanied by heavy and widespread precipitation
throughout the watershed can have pervasive and
lasting impacts on coastal ecosystems. Hurricane

J. Stein

features, ultimately losing the battle between
sea-level rise which acts to create them and the
movement of sediment off the land to fill their
shallow depths. With the slowing of the rise of sea
level 5,000 years ago (Figure 7.1), despite the fact that
land subsidence was still raising the water levels, the
filling of the Chesapeake Bay with sediments was
also occurring, both from the head with sediments
coming down the Susquehanna and the other great
rivers and from the mouth with sand transported
into the mouth of the Bay from the continental shelf.
Land clearing during the 17th and 18th centuries
resulted in large influx of sediments, filling in many
smaller tributaries that were navigable during the
colonial period. Continued relative sea-level rise a
century ago, dominated by the sinking of the land
rather than the rising of the ocean (see Section 7),
eroded shorelines and upland deposits, bringing
more sediments into the estuary. The gradual
disappearance of Chesapeake Bay islands provides
a graphic testament to this progression.112
The processes that control delivery of sediment to
the Bay’s waters—shoreline erosion, resuspension,
or erosion in the watershed and subsequent delivery
by rivers—are, in turn, controlled by the weather.
As in other bodies of water, sediment transport in
the Bay and its watershed occurs as a comparatively
slow, inexorable process occasionally punctuated by
episodes of wholesale erosion and deposition driven
by violent storms. Hurricanes are especially effective
because they combine extreme winds and extreme
precipitation. As far as sediment is concerned,
extreme precipitation is the greater concern because
it rapidly erodes the watershed. Increased flashiness
in runoff due to both land development and, more
recently, attributable to climate change washes more
sediment off the land surface and erodes stream
beds. Storm-driven water flow can be devastatingly
effective in moving large quantities of sediment in a
short interval. As Hurricane Agnes passed through
the Chesapeake watershed in 1972, dropping 3 to 6
inches of rain onto already saturated soils, some 31
million metric tons of sediment were swept into the
Bay, depositing 40 years worth of sediments based
on the average deposition rate.
The scale and geometry of Chesapeake Bay make
it particularly vulnerable to tropical cyclones that
travel a path with their center or eye moving on the
west side of the Bay.113 While eastern-track storms
act to force water out of the Bay, these western
storm tracks create destructive storm surges, such as
occurred during the recent 2003 Hurricane Isabel.
The linear nature of the Bay and its larger tributaries

NOAA

64  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Shoreline erosion from storms.

section 8: chesapeake bay & coastal ecosystems • 65
Agnes not only added a huge quantity of sediments
to the Chesapeake Bay, but also added nutrients and
organic matter, devastated oyster reefs and aquatic
vegetation beds, and affected key species, with
repercussions to the ecosystem lasting for decades.

Living Resources

Juvenile Thermal Habitat
boreal-temperate species

30

ladyfish

25
black seabass

Present mixture of cool and warm species

The Chesapeake Bay is famous for its role in
supporting spawning, nursery, and feeding
habitats for diverse and important living resources.
Historically, U.S. fisheries for shad, herrings, striped
bass, menhaden, and oysters were centered here in
the Chesapeake Bay. The Chesapeake Bay remains
one of the most important nurseries for striped
bass, croaker, eels, and blue crabs. The Atlantic
menhaden fishery is now principally limited to the
lower Chesapeake Bay, reflecting the productive
feeding conditions that occur there during summer
and fall months. Size, surrounding geography, tides,
currents, and other physical features all contribute
to the Chesapeake Bay’s productive food webs. But
the diversity and year-to-year abundances of living
resources also depend heavily on the Chesapeake
Bay’s latitude and seasons. The
Chesapeake Bay represents
Chesapeake Bay is
a transition zone between
a transition zone
more southerly ranging
between northern and temperate-subtropical species
southern species
and more northern range
boreal-temperate
species.
Interestingly, the Chesapeake Bay also shows the
greatest seasonal temperature range of any other
major U.S. Atlantic estuary. Therefore, in the future,
warming in the Chesapeake will likely diminish
the role of boreal-temperate species (Figure 8.3)
and affect seasonal temperature fluctuations,
which currently have an important role in nursery
function and how food webs and fish communities
are structured.114

temperate-subtropical species
35

20

spotted seatrout

15
summer flounder

10

bluefish

5
yellowtail flounder

0

Figure 8.3. Thermal ranges for juvenile fishes native to U.S. Atlantic
coastal waters (temperature in degrees C).114

range in the Netherlands portion of the Wadden
Sea.116 Warming in the Chesapeake and Coastal
Bays, coupled with existing stresses due to disease,
pollution, and sediments, is likely to eliminate
commercial harvests of the once economically
important soft shell clam in the coming decades and
may extinguish its local populations all together. As
indicated below, warming will also confound efforts
to restore eelgrass and sturgeons, compounding the
other stresses, such as turbid waters and hypoxia,
presently limiting their recovery.
Atlantic croaker is a subtropical fish that is
already making significant inroads in temperate
estuaries like the Chesapeake and Delaware Bay.
Croaker juveniles can reside during winter months
in Mid-Atlantic estuaries but can occasionally
experience lethally cold temperatures, particularly
to the north. During recent decades, more moderate
winter temperatures in the Chesapeake Bay have
increased juvenile growth and survival. Indeed
during the last twenty years, Chesapeake landings

More northerly, cool temperature species such
as eelgrass, soft shell clams, and sturgeons have
already been in decline in the Chesapeake Bay.
Soft shell clams occur at their southern limit in the
Chesapeake Bay and their Maryland landings have
declined from over 6 million pounds in the 1960s to
less than 300,000 pounds in recent years.115 Trends of
diminished production of soft shell clams in Europe
are related to climate, with poor juvenile production
linked to warming at the southern extreme of its

www.BayFlyFishing.com

Shift to warm species

Atlantic croakers are expanding their range in the Mid-Atlantic.

66  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
species may escape captivity and establish local
populations. For example, the beautiful lionfish, a
native of the Indo-Pacific and popular with saltwater aquarists, was inadvertently introduced in
Florida in the early 1990s and has
expanded its range northward
Warmer winter
to North Carolina, achieving
populations equal in number temperatures
to those of native groupers.118 could open the
Adding an additional species, such door to more
as the lionfish, to the mix has the non‒native,
potential to adversely affect native invasive species
fishes through competition for prey
and habitat and by directly eating
native juveniles. With warming of coastal ocean
temperatures, the lionfish is expected to continue a
northward range expansion (Figure 8.4). Similarly,
warmer waters may aid the spread (accidental or
otherwise) of northern snakehead fish, which now
occurs in the Potomac River119, to other parts of the
Chesapeake watershed.

Changed seasonality

Wikipedia Commons

Several important fish species show cycles of
dominance that are the opposite of each other.
Bluefish were abundant in the 1970s and 1980s
but then declined during the recent period of high
striped bass abundance. These cycles are thought to
be due to the seasonal patterns of temperature and
precipitation. Winter and early spring conditions
seem particularly important in ‘setting the clock’ for
patterns of juvenile production observed during the
subsequent summer and fall seasons. Cold winter
temperatures and high winter flows are associated
with high abundance later in the year of juvenile
Atlantic silversides (an important forage fish),
striped bass, white perch, and Atlantic needlefish.120
Species associated with the converse—low winter
flows and high winter temperatures—include
bluefish, spot, bay anchovy, and northern puffer.

NOAA

of Atlantic croaker have increased ten-fold to 8.6
million pounds in 2006 and now exceed commercial
landings for striped bass (3.6 million pounds).117
The Atlantic croaker belongs to the drum family,
which also include black drum, red drum, weakfish,
spotted and speckled sea trout, spot, and Northern
and Southern kingfish. Other members of this
family of fishes, together with other more subtropical species, are likely to become more frequent
and longer term visitors to the Chesapeake Bay.
Fish species that already occur in Virginia coastal
waters that should also become more prevalent and
abundant with increased coastal water temperature
include southern flounder, cobia, spadefish, Spanish
mackerel, mullet, tarpon, and pinfish. On the other
hand, more temperate species such as yellow perch,
white perch, striped bass, black sea bass, tautog,
summer and winter flounders, silver hake, and scup
will be stressed by warming of the coastal waters.
Milder winters could also allow brown and
pink shrimp to complete their life cycles in the
Chesapeake and Coastal Bays, where they are
now only occasional summertime visitors. These
shrimp are abundant in North Carolina (e.g.,
Pamlico Sound), where they support important
fisheries. Establishment of shrimp populations
in the Chesapeake Bay could result in important
commercial opportunities in the future, but would
also have important but unpredictable effects on
both the prey and predators of shrimp.
Warming could also favor the establishment of
invasive populations of nonnative species. This is
particularly true for species from distant parts that
hitchhiked on or in the ballast water of ships. Also,

Figure 8.4. Locations in the Atlantic Ocean where lionfish have
been reported as of May 2003.

Striped bass from the Chesapeake Bay.

section 8: chesapeake bay & coastal ecosystems • 67
Shifts between these two groups occur even when
winter temperatures differ less than 2°F, well within
the range of warming projected in the next fifty
years. Species will adapt to some degree to changing
environmental changes, but because this will require
generational time scales, lowered abundance of the
group of species that includes striped bass are likely
for the Chesapeake Bay.
Milder winters would lead to longer growing
seasons for species such as sea grasses, oysters, blue
crab, eels, white perch, and the resident portion
of the striped bass population. Blue crabs become
functionally dormant during winter months when
temperatures drop below
50°F. Below 41°F in bottom
Milder winters could
waters, winter temperatures
mean longer growing
become lethal.121 Winter
seasons for species
temperature
projections
such as blue crabs
indicate a 20% reduction in
the number of days with less
than 50°F by 2050 and, under
the higher emissions scenario, a 36% reduction by
2100. The projections suggest that by mid-century
there would be no severe winters with more than
a week of water temperatures below 41°F. These
warmer conditions are likely to shorten the time it
takes for blue crabs to grow and reproduce, leading
to increased productivity and yield to commercial
fisheries. Of course, this assumes that there would
be sufficient prey for blue crabs and that warming
during the summer does not reduce the growth
rate or increase the death rate as a result of greater
disease incidence or expanded hypoxia.
The degree to which the Chesapeake Bay freezes
over is already much reduced in comparison to
fifty years ago. The reduced occurrence of ice in
shoreline habitats could permit oysters to colonize
sheltered shorelines and very shallow waters to
form reefs that emerge at low tide, much as they do
now in North Carolina. Such reefs could provide
new opportunities for restoration and aquaculture
by enabling access and enforcement of protection of
rebuilding or leased bottom reefs.
Warming and the shifting of seasons are likely
to affect migration and spawning behaviors of
Chesapeake Bay fish. Striped bass, shads and other
fish that migrate into the Chesapeake for spring
spawning will likely shift their arrival times to earlier
dates. Such a shift is already apparent in migrating
fish in other regions. Spawning migrations by
Atlantic salmon in the Connecticut River are now
over ten days earlier than in 1978.122 American
shad migrated five weeks earlier in 1993 than in

1949 in the Columbia River.123 Changes in timing
of spawning migrations by adult fish can influence
early survival and growth of their offspring. For
instance, fish larvae in the Chesapeake Bay rely on
spring plankton blooms to support their growth and
development. Early spawning migrations by adults
could result in a ‘mismatch’ 124 between spawning
and plankton blooms needed to support the growth
and survival of larvae (Figure 8.5).
Another type of mismatch that can occur is
between migration timing and fishing regulations.
If changes in the timing of migration are sufficiently
large, they may impact the timing and duration of a
fishing season. For example, the Maryland ‘trophy’
striped bass recreational season targets postspawning individuals. Here, early spawning could
effectively reduce the fishing season if the season
has a fixed start date. In response to increasing
temperatures, management agencies may need to
explore temperature-specific regulations, rather
than fixed fishing seasons.

The Great Shellfish Bay

Native Americans referred to it as Chesepiooc, or
Match

Mismatch

Time
phytoplankton

yolk-sac fish larvae

zooplankton

post yolk-sac fish larvae

fish egg

Figure 8.5. Matching of first-feeding fish larvae with the timing of
zooplankton peak abundance. A match occurs when spawning is
well-timed and there is overlap between the occurrence of first
feeding larvae and peaks in zooplankton abundance and favors
early growth and survival. Mismatches of timing and location
correspond to poor growth and survival conditions.

68  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
that the Chesapeake Bay is already warm enough
so that temperature is not a factor limiting Dermo
epidemics except under higher
salinity conditions. MSX is also Warmer conditions
more prevalent in oysters after
have allowed oyster
dry and warm winters and less so
following cold winters (less than diseases to spread
37°F) and under low salinity.129
Successive cold winters keeps MSX in check, but, as
this becomes less likely with the warming waters of
the Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Bays, this disease is
likely to remain at least as prevalent if not more so.
Overall, the net effects of climate change on
oyster populations, aquaculture, and restoration
are difficult to project. They will depend not only
on the direct effects of salinity and temperature
on oyster growth and survival, but importantly on
how the changing conditions affect the prevalence
and virulence of the disease organisms, which
warmer conditions should favor. Still, it should be
remembered that native oyster populations prosper
in Gulf Coast estuaries, which experience higher
temperatures and more variable salinities.

Aquatic vegetation

Jane Hawkey

Submerged aquatic vegetation (vascular plants
that live underwater) constitutes a very important
component of the Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Bay
ecosystems. These plants increase water quality in
shallow water areas by reducing the resuspension
of sediment and releasing oxygen to the sediments,
thereby enhancing nutrient recycling. The vegetation
provides habitat for many animals, including blue
crabs, which use it as a refuge from predators during
early life.130 There is currently a worldwide decline
in coastal submerged plants, or seagrasses, including
in the Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Bays.131 Much

NOAA

great shellfish bay, because of the vast abundance of
oysters that once characterized the Chesapeake Bay.
Decimated initially by overharvesting that resulted
in removal of their reefs themselves and later by
introduced diseases, native oysters are present at
a very small fraction of their original abundance.
Substantial efforts are underway to try to determine
how to increase oyster aquaculture and to restore
oyster reefs for the role they play in providing habitat
for other organisms and clearing up estuarine waters
by their filter feeding.
Variations in climate have always been important
in determining the success of oysters. Temperature
and precipitation—through its effect on salinity—
affect reproduction, the development of larvae,
and the survival of newly settled oyster spat. Still,
through the 1970s, the abundance of juvenile oysters
in one year was heavily influenced by the abundance
of the adult parents the year before.125 Recently, it
appears that at such low abundance, the number of
adults has relatively little influence on the number of
juveniles, which is now predominantly determined
by water temperature and particularly salinity.126
If higher river runoff regularly lowers Bay salinity,
fewer juvenile oysters would be expected to survive,
but if sea-level rise increases the volume of the Bay
sufficiently to increase salinity, the reverse would be
true.
The two prevalent oyster diseases, commonly
called Dermo and MSX, are also likely to respond
to climate change. Dermo epidemics are more
severe in Chesapeake Bay after dry and warm
winters. Increased water temperatures cause more
rapid cell growth by the Dermo parasite once it has
infected an oyster.127 As conditions have warmed,
Dermo has extended farther up the East Coast,
even to New England.128 But it may be the case

Oyster reef, Chesapeake Bay.

Aquatic vegetation provides habitat for juvenile fish and crabs.

section 8: chesapeake bay & coastal ecosystems • 69
of this loss is a result of nutrient over-enrichment,
which increases shading by phytoplankton and
stimulates the growth of algae on the blades of
vegetation, thereby reducing the light needed for
photosynthesis.93
Aquatic vegetation requires suitable temperature,
salinity, nutrients, and, in particular, light.132
Climate change could affect, directly or indirectly,
all of these variables. As in the case of fish and other
animal species, aquatic plant species have different
latitudinal distributions that are closely related to
their temperature tolerance.
The dominant aquatic plant
Eelgrass is at risk of
elimination and other species under the higher
salinity conditions of the
species will replace it
lower Chesapeake Bay and
the Coastal Bays is eelgrass
(Zostera marina), a boreal-temperate species with a
southern limit of distribution in North Carolina.133
Largely as a result of declining water quality and
increased light limitation, eelgrass has become
much less abundant in Maryland bays. During the
high salinity and high water clarity conditions that
existed in the 1960s, eelgrass was found as far up the
Chesapeake Bay as Kent Island, but now is largely
limited to the Tangier Sound region (Figure 8.6),
where it provides valuable habitat for early juvenile
blue crabs and refuge for the highly vulnerable soft
stages of adults.

Historic Upper Extents
of Eelgrass
in the Chesapeake Bay
 



1960s



present











N
0

30 miles

Figure 8.6. Changes in the distribution of eelgrass (Zostera marina)
in the Chesapeake Bay.

At high summer temperatures, eelgrass
photosynthesis cannot keep pace with its respiration
and the plant loses its leaves and even its belowground rhizomes may die.134 During unusually
hot summers, for example in 2005, the dieback of
eelgrass was extensive and recovery in the following
year was dependent on the bank of seeds left in the
sediment. Because eelgrass seeds do not remain
viable for over a year, if there were a succession
of hot summers, eelgrass populations could be
eliminated from the Bay. Consequently, the outlook
for eelgrass in the warming bays is not promising.
By mid-century, it is as likely as not that eelgrass
beds will no longer exist in the Chesapeake Bay
under the lower emissions scenario, and likely that
it will be functionally eliminated under the higher
emissions scenario. It is very likely that eelgrass will
be completely extirpated by the end of the century
under either scenario. It is possible, however, that
shoalgrass (Halodule beaudettei), a subtropical
species that is abundant in higher salinity portions
of North Carolina’s sounds could colonize the
Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Bays as the winters
warm. However, it does not tolerate low salinity as
much as eelgrass and, thus, its distribution in the
upper Bay would be more limited. Shoalgrass is also
more ephemeral and provides less robust habitat
than eelgrass.
As sea level continues to rise, increasing water
depths will reduce the light available to aquatic
vegetation where it presently occurs. However,
the vegetation could migrate shoreward and even
occupy areas that are presently tidal wetlands or dry
land. However, as wetlands erode away, hard clayrich deposits often remain, a consolidated remnant
of older wetland soils. These clay deposits are not
suitable soils for submerged vegetation and until
covered by a veneer of sand will not be colonized.135
With the increased volume of the Chesapeake Bay
because of accelerated sea-level rise, higher salinity
conditions are likely to extend farther up the Bay.
While greater intrusion of salinity may be beneficial
to seagrasses such as eelgrass and shoalgrass (if it
successfully colonizes the Bay), it could constrict
the habitat suitable for plants originating from fresh
waters, such as redhead grass and sago pondweed,
that are prevalent in lower salinity regions, where
aquatic vegetation is currently expanding as water
quality improves.93
While the net effects of climate change on aquatic
vegetation are difficult to predict because of the
complex and interacting effects of temperature,
salinity, water quality, and sea level, it is very

70 • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
likely that the biomass, species composition, and
distribution of aquatic vegetation in the Chesapeake
Bay and Coastal Bays will be significantly affected
by climate change.

absorb more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
The effects of ocean acidification have just recently
been receiving attention, most of which is focused
on corals and the plankton of the open ocean.
Recent studies have shown that mollusks that are
ecologically and economically
important in coastal waters Declining ocean pH
may be vulnerable to the affects ability of oysters
effects of ocean acidification.
and other shellfish to
Mussel and oyster calcification
rates were projected to decline form shells
by 25 and 20%, respectively
by the end of the century136, as well as the ability
of oyster larvae to form their thin shells when pH
was reduced to 7.4 through addition of carbon
dioxide.137
Research on the processes and effects of
acidification in Mid-Atlantic estuaries and coastal
waters has scarcely begun. Important questions
remain regarding the interaction of the bicarbonate
created when carbon dioxide dissolves in these
waters with other chemical constituents. This will
affect the level of acidity likely to be experienced
and the effects that might be realized not only on
mollusks, but also crustaceans, starfish, and other
organisms that create calcareous skeletons.

Ocean Acidification

Maryland beach.

Ben Fertig

Holly Weiss

In addition to its greenhouse effect, the increase
in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere is gradually acidifying, or lowering the
pH, of the ocean. Much of the carbon dioxide that
is released from human activities is actually taken
up by the ocean, moderating its effect on global
warming. However, when carbon dioxide dissolves
in sea water, it decreases its pH. From the beginning
of the industrial era, pH has declined about 0.1 units
from its normal 8.18, and may decline by a further
0.3 to 0.5 units by 2100.2 While this will not make
the oceans actually acidic (below 7 pH units), such a
decline in pH affects the ability of organisms to create
shells or skeletons of calcium carbonate because
lowering the pH decreases the concentration of the
carbonate ions that are required.
Ocean acidification is the sleeper issue of global
change, because not only are the potential effects
on the world’s coral reefs profound, but the process
of acidification also reduces the ocean’s capacity to

The native eastern oyster, Crassostrea virginica.

section 9: human health • 71

human health
 Health risks due to heat stress are very likely to increase if emissions are not reduced.

Under the higher emissions scenario, in particular, heat waves are projected to greatly increase risks of illness and
death before the end of the century, with an average of 24 days per summer exceeding 100°F. Some, but not all, of
these increased risks can be reduced by air conditioning and other adaptation measures.

 Respiratory illnesses are likely to increase, unless air pollution is greatly reduced.

More ozone, responsible for multiple respiratory illnesses, is formed under prolonged, high temperatures. Releases
of air pollutants (nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds) that cause ozone to be formed have been
declining, but would have to be reduced much more to avoid a reversal in progress toward achieving air quality
standards.

 Increased risks of pathogenic diseases are less likely.

The mortality due to vector-borne and non-vector borne diseases in the United States is low because of public
health precautions and treatment. Climate change might affect the exposure of Marylanders to pathogens such as
the West Nile virus, but precautions and treatment could manage this risk.

H

uman well-being is
obviously affected
by the weather
and the changing climate will
have multiple ramifications
for human health as well as
comfort and enjoyment. Human
health has the greatest sensitivity to
climate change with regard to heat stress; the effects
of storms that generate floods and extremely high
winds; air pollution effects, particularly as they
cause or exacerbate asthma and other respiratory
maladies; and diseases caused by pathogens that
are borne by insects and other vectors, water, and
food.138 The risk of storms and floods are addressed
earlier in this assessment. Here the potential impacts
of climate change-related heat waves, air quality, and
pathogenic diseases on human health in Maryland
are evaluated.

with its temperate climate related to extreme winter
temperatures. Rather, most assessments in the
United States have appropriately focused on the
health risks of extreme heat. In six out of ten recent
years, heat has been the leading weather-related
killer in the United States.7
Concerns about the increased health risks
from heat waves caused by global warming are
not far-fetched. The death of an estimated 35,000
people, attributable to the August 2003 heat wave
in Europe, was a sobering experience.139 Parts of
France experienced seven consecutive days with
temperatures more than 104°F and 14,800 people
died in that country alone. The situation in Europe

Heat Waves
Global warming is likely to result in substantially
higher temperatures both in winter and summer
in Maryland. While there could be some benefits
in terms of reduced deaths from cardiovascular
disease (for example, as result of milder winters)
Maryland’s population experiences very few deaths

NOAA

Section 9

key points

Dawn brings on the day’s heat.

72  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
95 and 24 days per year, respectively. These numbers
would be higher in urban areas due to the urban
‘heat island’ effect. These projections are generally
similar to those derived by the Northeastern
Climate Impacts Assessment for Philadelphia
(Figure 9.1).7 Put another way,
these projections indicate that With continued
toward the end of the century growth in emissions,
under the high emissions
24 days per summer
scenario, it would be a rare
summer day when the high are projected to
temperature did not top 90°F exceed 100°F
and there would be nearly
a month where temperatures reached 100°F. A
considerable increase in 90°F days is very likely
inevitable, even if greenhouse gas emissions were
reduced around the middle of the century (lower
Temperatures in Philadelphia, PA
90

Days per year over 90°F

days over 100°F

80

2

9 28

70

1961-1990

2070-2099

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1961-1990

2010-2039

2040-2069

lower emissions

2070-2099

higher emissions

Figure 9.1. Model projections of number of days per year that
the maximum temperatures would exceed 90°F and 100°F in
Philadelphia according the NECIA.7 The higher emissions scenario
employed assumed more rapid growth of greenhouse gas
emissions than the higher emissions scenario in this assessment.

Andrea Hetherington

was particularly acute because the population was
not acclimated to warm summers and there was
little air conditioning. Most of those who died were
elderly. Closer to home, a 1995 heat wave in Chicago
resulted in an estimated 696 deaths.140 While the
European heat wave was related to unusual weather
patterns and not primarily to climate change,
climate models predict frequent summer conditions
not unlike those in 2003 during the latter part of
the 21st century, indicating that, for many purposes,
the 2003 event can be used as an analog of future
summers in climate impact assessments.141
Heat stress can result in illnesses caused by heat
cramps, fainting, heat exhaustion, and heatstroke
and result in death.142 Except for cramps, heatrelated illnesses are the result of the body’s failure
to regulate its internal temperature. Our bodies
respond to hot weather by an increase in blood
circulation and increase in perspiration, both in an
attempt to rid the body of heat. The effectiveness of
such heat loss is reduced when air temperature and
humidity increase. The ability to increase circulation
may be limited by heart rate and the blood volume,
which is reduced because of the loss of body fluids.
Several factors can increase the risk of heatrelated illness. Both individuals over 65 and the
very young are at higher risk because they have
less ability to control internal temperatures and
are more susceptible to dehydration. Reduced
physical fitness, obesity, existing illnesses, and the
use of medicinal drugs such as stimulants and
beta-blockers all increase the risk of heat stress.
Individuals not acclimated to high temperature or
suffering from exertion are also more susceptible.
City dwellers, particularly those of lower economic
status who cannot afford air conditioning, are at
greater risk because of the urban heat island effect,
where buildings and paved surfaces hold the heat
well into the night.143 Many of those who die of heat
stress live alone and do not seek treatment or are not
discovered until it is too late. And most of those who
die in urban areas as a result of heat stress succumb
during the night, when temperatures are expected
to rise even more than during the daytime.42
The average annual frequency of days with a
maximum temperature exceeding 90°F in Maryland
is projected to grow gradually over the century,
but more dramatically later in the century. Near
the end of the century under the lower emissions
scenario, the model averages project about 64 days
per year would exceed 90°F and 10 days per year
would exceed 100°F (Figure 4.4). Under the higher
emissions scenario, these numbers would grow to

Cooling off in the intense summer heat.

section 9: human health • 73
be a premium on energy conservation to mitigate
greenhouse gas emissions.

Air Quality
Global climate change could affect human
respiratory health by changing levels of air pollutants
and the types and levels of pollen. For the United
States, impacts of climate change on ground level,
or tropospheric, ozone are much more likely to be
more important than for other air pollutants. This
is due to the importance of high temperature in the
formation of ozone as well as the large areas of the
country currently affected by ozone levels exceeding
national standards (Figure 9.2). Central Maryland
is among the most affected regions in the nation.
Ozone can affect human health by irritation of
the respiratory system, reducing lung function,
aggravation of asthma by increasing sensitivity to
allergens, increased susceptibility to respiratory
infections, and inflammation and damage to the
lining of the lungs, causing chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Effects can range from
coughing and shortness of breath to permanent
Nonattainment and Maintenance Areas in the U.S.
8-hour Ozone Standard

Nonattainment
Areas (418 entire
counties)

Nonattainment
Areas (44 partial
counties)

Maintenance
Areas (12 entire or
partial counties)

March 2006

Figure 9.2. Counties not attaining the 8-hour ozone standard
include most Maryland counties.

University of North Carolina

emissions scenario), but only about half as many
100°F days would occur if emissions were reduced.
Of course, as the frequency of very hot days
increases so does the likelihood that there will be
a successive number of these days, i.e., a heat wave.
Based on the model projections, there is a high
probability that, late in the century, heat waves with
daily temperatures exceeding 90°F would last more
than 60 days is high under the higher emissions
scenario. Under the low emissions scenario in most
years, heat waves would not exceed 20 days. The
difference between the scenarios is even greater for
severe heat waves such as experienced in Europe in
2003 (successive days with temperature exceeding
100°F).
Based on these temperature and heat wave
projections, Maryland is likely to confront
substantially increased heat-related health risks by
the mid-century and beyond. By late in the century
under the high emissions scenario, this situation
is likely to become very
serious, with life threatening
Heat-related health
conditions developing nearly
risks likely to increase every year, particularly in the
significantly in urban
Baltimore and Washington
environments
urban areas because of the
urban heat island effect
and more at-risk individuals living there. Beyond
threatening life for the most vulnerable, these
oppressive conditions would curtail outdoor
activities and diminish productivity in commercial
activities requiring outdoor work. Under the lower
emissions scenario, heat-related health risks would
increase substantially from the present condition
but much less so than with the unmitigated growth
in emissions.
Of course, there are steps that can be taken to
lower these health risks. Within limits, acclimation
to higher outdoor temperatures and various
adaptation measures can lower the incidences of
heat-related deaths. Adaptation measures include
effective early warning and response plans for heat
waves, air conditioning, and better education about
personal precautions, such as drinking more fluids,
wearing light colored and loose fitting clothing, and
limiting outdoor activity. Over the longer term,
building codes can be designed to reduce the urban
heat island effect, for example, by increasing the
tree canopy and including reflective or green roofs.
More frequent and severe heat waves will very likely
increase requirements for air conditioning, extend
the air-conditioning season, and increasing peakload electricity demands at the very time there will

Physicians review lung x-rays.

ozone
3

g
oxy

en

volatile
organic nit
compounds ox roge
id e n
s

Figure 9.3. Ozone is created by the chemical reaction of air
pollutants in the presence of sunlight.

The top image shows the reduced visibility (25 miles) in the
downtown Washington, D.C. area in July 2006. The bottom image
was taken in October 2005 where the visual range was 55 miles.
160
140

Daily Ozone (ppbv)

scaring of the lungs and even death. Central
Maryland has some of the highest incidence of
asthma and acute respiratory illness in the country.
It is estimated that about 2,000 Marylanders die
each year because of chronic lower respiratory
illnesses.
Maryland has made substantial progress in
controlling air pollution. Baltimore and Washington
areas are on a path leading to compliance with the
National Ambient Air quality Standards (NAAQS)
by 2009, but changes in the global background
could reverse this progress and require even deeper
reductions of the pollutants responsible for ozone
formation. Human activities do not emit ozone
per se, but our activities result in the release to
the atmosphere nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon
monoxide (CO), and volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). NOx and CO are emitted mainly by the
combustion of fossil fuels and VOCs are emitted
from incomplete combustions of fuels and the
evaporation of petroleum fuels and chemicals and by
certain plants. These compounds react with oxygen
in the atmosphere in the presence of sunlight to
create ozone (O3; Figure 9.3).
The process of ozone formation depends on
high air temperatures, which explains why we
do not have ozone alerts during the winter even
though emissions of NOx and VOCs are just as
high then. As Figure 9.4 shows, there is a clear
relationship between the maximum temperature
at the Baltimore-Washington International
Airport (BWI) and ozone concentrations in the
Baltimore non-attainment area.144 Furthermore,
heat waves (multiple successive days with very
high temperatures) create the optimum conditions
for ozone formation. This is apparent in the
Baltimore non-attainment area where the number
of days where ozone concentrations exceed the 8hour “Code Orange” standards in a year shows

NPS

74  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

Temperature (ºF)

Figure 9.4. More ozone is formed under higher temperatures.
Peak 8-hour ozone concentrations in the Baltimore region for
May-September, 1994-2004, compared to maximum temperature
at BWI Airport.138

close relationship with the number of days where
maximum temperatures exceed 90°F (Figure 9.5).
Climate change is also likely to decrease the
occurrence of cyclonic waves (low pressure system
with associated weather fronts), thus lengthening

Number of Days

60
50

number of 8hr ozone exceedances
number of days over 90˚F

40
30
20
10
0

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

Figure 9.5. Heat waves (multiple days with temperatures exceeding
90°F) increase the buildup of ground-level ozone.

the duration of stagnant, high pressure events
(hot and hazy periods) and delay the onset of cold
fronts that clean up air pollution episodes.145 Such
smog episodes not only decrease the visual range
but can also cause human
Ozone alert days likely illness and death due to
higher concentrations of
to grow, requiring more fine particulate matter. The
aggressive reduction of persistent Bermuda High
air pollution
leads to weak or stagnant
winds,
high
daytime
temperatures, and intense UV radiation reaching
the Earth’s surface. Pollution and VOCs build up
from gasoline vapors and even trees, particularly
pines and oaks that are favored by global warming.
All of this is exacerbated by the urban heat island
effect.146
Based on the increase in summer temperatures
and heat waves and these changes in weather
patterns, scientists have projected anything from
a 3-5 ppb147 to a 10-20 ppb148 increase in 8-hour
average ozone concentrations over the eastern
United States by the end of the century, assuming
emissions of the ozone-precursor pollutants
remain constant. One recent study projected a 28%
increase in the average number of days exceeding
8-hour ozone standards for Baltimore and a 50%
increase for Washington, D.C. by 2050.149 On the
other hand, if emissions of NOx are reduced by
50%, then ozone concentrations could, according
to another study, actually decline by 11-28% despite
the warming conditions.150 The decline in observed
ozone concentrations in the Baltimore region for
given temperature ranges (Figure 9.6) provides clear
evidence of the importance of reducing precursor
emissions.
In summary, it is very likely that without
significant additional reductions in air pollution by
NOx and VOCs, ground level ozone concentrations

120
110

1987-2002

100
90
2003-2006

80
70
60
50

80-84

85-89

90-94

>95

BWI Maximum Temperature (˚F)
Figure 9.6. Maximum ozone concentrations have declined for
each temperature range in recent years as a result of the reduction
of emissions of air pollutants.

will increase and pose additional health risks to
people residing in central Maryland. In addition
to mitigation by reducing pollutant emissions,
adaptive responses are similar to those for heat
stress: warning systems, air conditioning, avoiding
exertion and outdoor activity, and increasing tree
cover.

Maryland Power Plant Research Program, MD DNR

Climatology of Code Orange ozone and 90°F
in Baltimore Non-attainment Area

Daily 8hr Maximum Ozone (ppbV)

section 9: human health • 75

There are 34 power plants operating in Maryland as of 2006.

76  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Pathogenic Diseases

University of Maryland

Climate change can increase human exposure and
vulnerability of diseases caused by pathogenic
microorganisms.138 These include diseases borne
by various animal vectors, such as malaria, dengue,
Lyme disease, and encephalitis, a type of which may
be caused by the West Nile virus. Global warming
could increase the range or abundance of the animal
vectors. Climate change could also affect exposure
to non-vector borne diseases such as hantavirus,
cryptosporidiosis, and cholera. The incidence and
associated mortality of most of these diseases in
the United States is relatively low because of public
health precautions and the availability of treatment.
For Maryland, the increased risks due to heat stress
and respiratory impairment are likely to be more
serious than for pathogenic diseases.
Moreover, it is difficult to project how climate
changes would impact pathogenic transmission
and human health because of the complexity of
climatic effects on vectors and other environmental
factors.138 Cryptosporidiosis is an intestinal disease
caused by a bacterium that is abundant in livestock
feces and can be transported during high rainfall
events. The bacterium is small and resistant to
chlorination, making it difficult to kill or filter out
of water supplies. Lyme disease has become the
most important vector-borne diseases in the United
States and a large majority of cases occurs in the
Northeast, although it is less prevalent in Maryland
than in the states to the north. The ticks that transmit
Lyme disease prefer cooler temperatures during the
summer, so the projected warming could reduce

Heavy rains and coastal flooding combined with warm weather
provides perfect conditions for an explosion of mosquitoes.

American Lyme Disease Foundation, Inc.

tick populations and disease risk.7 Continued
encroachment of suburbs into former woodlands
presents a far greater risk for contraction of Lyme
disease. Outbreaks of West Nile virus in humans
seem to occur when extreme heat and drought are
followed by heavy rains. It is thought that birds that
host the virus migrate to wetter areas during the
drought and the mosquitoes that normally prey on
birds switch to humans when they hatch following
the rains.7

The dark pink area, which includes most of Maryland, represents
a medium density of host-seeking ticks that have been shown to
be infected with Lyme disease bacteria.

section 10: implications for mitigation & adaptation • 77

implications for mitigation & adaptation
 Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions has substantial benefits for Maryland.

Mitigation of global emissions by mid-century would very likely result in significantly lower sea-level rise, reduced
public health risks, fewer extreme weather events, less decline in agricultural and forest productivity, and loss of
biodiversity and species important to the Chesapeake Bay. Even more serious impacts beyond this century would
be avoided.

 Develop adaptation strategies for human health, water resources, and restoration of bays.

Adaptation strategies to reduce coastal vulnerability should plan for a 2 to 4 foot rise in sea level during the century.
The Commission should evaluate additional adaptation strategies related to human health, water resources, forest
management, and restoration of the Chesapeake Bay and Maryland’s Coastal Bays.

 Organize and enhance Maryland’s capacity for monitoring and assessment of climate
impacts.

A more extensive, sustained, and coordinated system for monitoring the changing climate and its impacts is
required. Maryland is in a strong position to become a national and international leader in regional-to-global
climate change analysis and its application to mitigation and adaptation.

T

his assessment of the
impacts of climate
change on Maryland
was undertaken as one of
three integrated components
of the Plan of Action of
Maryland’s Commission on
Climate Change. To that end, it is
appropriate to draw implications from the impacts
assessment to inform the other efforts to mitigate
climate change by reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and to adapt to changes likely, thereby
reducing Maryland’s vulnerability. This concluding
section briefly summarizes the findings of the
impacts assessment related to those two objectives.

and immediate reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions. However, the path that humankind
will follow in either continuing to increase those
emissions or reducing them will have a large effect
on the extent of climate change and magnitude of
its consequences.
This assessment seeks to identify both those
changes in Maryland that are likely inevitable and
those changes that can be avoided with action to
reduce emissions through the use of the lower and
higher emissions scenarios. A point made earlier
bears repeating: the higher emissions scenario is not

Mitigation
Reducing emissions soon is required

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
has demonstrated that on a global scale, there are
likely to be large changes in climate and substantial
and serious effects on natural ecosystems,
resources, and human populations and societies.3
The IPCC showed that some of these changes
are inevitable because they have already begun
and cannot easily be stopped, even with dramatic

CSIRO

Section 10

key points

Improved fuel economy and less vehicles on the road could
provide some reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.

and does not represent a ceiling nor the most extreme
changes that are likely, and the lower emissions
scenario is not a floor and does not represent the
minimum effects that may be achievable. Currently,
emissions are growing faster than the higher
scenario assumes. The IPCC estimated that it would
require early reductions of global greenhouse gas
emissions of 50 to 85% by 2050 to constrain the
increase in the global mean temperature to 3.6 to
4.5°F,3 a level of warming generally thought to have
dangerous consequences, and would, therefore, still
have many negative consequences as this report
attests. Under the lower emissions scenario used
in this assessment, the emissions in 2050 would be
declining but still be about 30% higher than today.
For that reason, the IPCC is planning to develop
scenarios incorporating earlier and more dramatic
emission reductions in its future assessments.
For the most part, the projections of impacts
under the lower and higher emissions scenarios are
similar or only modestly different at the middle of
the 21st century. This is hardly surprising because the
cumulative emissions are little different between the
two scenarios by that point in time (Figure 3.3). The
differences become starker towards the end of the
century, even though the lower emissions scenario
shows only about a 50% reduction in emissions
by that time. Thus, the lower emissions scenario
projections represent what might be considered
the maximum change that could be expected if
the mitigation strategies now being advanced in
international negotiations are implemented. With
that in mind, the following are some of the more
severe impacts projected for late 21st century
climate change in Maryland that could potentially
be avoided by global action to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions during the first half of century:
• Sea-level rise of up to 3.5 feet as opposed to
less than 2 feet; the loss of virtually all coastal
wetlands; inundation of more than 100 square
miles of presently dry land and loss of the
homes of thousands of Marylanders; and
the likely initiation of a 20-feet or more rise
in sea level in later centuries as a result of
unstoppable melting of polar ice sheets.
• Heat waves lasting most of the summer, with
an average of 30 days each summer exceeding
100°F (like Phoenix but with high humidity)
creating life-threatening conditions in
Maryland’s urban environments during most
years; and increased respiratory health risks due
to ground-level ozone concentrations unless
pollution emissions are dramatically reduced.

Wikipedia Commons

78  • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland

Record energy use and heat waves often coincide.

• More extreme rainfall events, but also longer
lasting summer droughts, not unlike the
unusual conditions seen in Maryland over the
past year.
• Declines in agricultural productivity, which
may be initially enhanced due to warmer
temperatures and higher carbon dioxide
concentrations, as a result of severe heat stress
and the summer droughts.
• Reduced forest productivity and ability to
sequester carbon, after a modest increase
during the first half of the century, as a
result of heat stress, seasonal droughts, and
outbreaks of pests and diseases; the loss
of maple-beech-birch forests of Western
Maryland and an increase in pine trees in
the landscape of the rest of the state; and the
withdrawal of northern bird species such as
the Baltimore oriole from Maryland.
• The permanent loss of important species
such as eelgrass and soft shell clams from the
Chesapeake Bay; highly stressful summer
conditions for striped bass and other fish as
the dead zone expands and surface waters
heat up; and a substantially more difficult
challenge in restoring the health of the Bay by
reducing nutrient pollution.
Limiting the projected impacts in this assessment
to the 21st century undervalues the full benefits
of mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions taken
early in the century. The impacts of unmitigated
climate change will not stabilize in 2100 but
continue beyond, in some cases at an accelerated
pace. In fact, some responses have a long lag effect,
meaning that the effects will continue to grow over
centuries.2 This is particularly true for sea-level rise

This image shows the calving front, or break-off point into the
ocean, of Helheim Glacier, located in southeast Greenland. The
image, taken in May 2005, shows high calving activity associated
with faster glacial flow. This glacier is now one of the fastest
moving glaciers in the world.

because of the slow process of warming the ocean
and the continued melting of polar ice sheets. If
emissions continue to grow at the pace of the higher
emissions scenario or greater,
it is likely that the climate
Impacts of climate
system will be committed to
change will not
an accelerated melt down of
stabilize in 2100, and
the polar ice sheets over the
sea level will continue next few centuries that could
to rise
not be stopped by reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.
Lest one think that is such a long time in the future,
remember that European colonization of Maryland
began 374 years ago and Maryland became a state
227 years ago.

Changing conditions affect mitigation

Conditions will change in ways that affect mitigation
options. For example, forests that are stressed by
heat and low soil moisture during the summer will
cease to take up and hold (or sequester) carbon from
the atmosphere. Instead, they will tend to release
stored carbon back into the atmosphere as carbon
dioxide. Heat stress will increase the demand for
air conditioning and extend the cooling season. At
times, air conditioning will not be a luxury, but a
matter of survival. This would offset mitigation
savings through energy conservation and increase
peak electricity demand, which determines the
generation capacity required.
Some of the projected climate changes are likely to
make the accomplishment of present environmental
objectives more difficult, for example, attaining
ozone concentration standards by reducing
air pollution or achieving the Chesapeake Bay
restoration goals by reducing nutrient agricultural

and urban runoff of nutrients and sediments.
However, most of the projected impacts of climate
change will not be realized until the middle of
the century or later, and some are not yet very
predictable. Therefore, there is ample opportunity to
continue to pursue those environmental objectives
aggressively because this would lessen the impacts
of climate change later on. Freezing action due to
the uncertain effects of climate change would result
in unavoidable and more severe consequences.

Adaptation
Sea-level rise and coastal vulnerability

Based on the current scientific understanding of the
complex processes that will affect future sea level as
considered in the projections of this assessment, it is
prudent to plan now for one foot of relative sea level
rise by the middle of the century and at least two
feet by the end of the century. For major, long lifetime investments in property and infrastructure,
it would be prudent to consider an additional
margin of safety by planning for a four foot rise in
sea level. New observations of the global and local
rates of sea level rise, new scientific understanding
of the processes of melting of polar ice sheets,
and improved capabilities for long-range storm
forecasting could alter this advice, but more severe
impacts are not likely to be realized until the second
half of the century. Consequently, plans and policies
should be periodically reevaluated with regard to
this emerging understanding and the progress in
reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Subsequent adaptation strategies

The Maryland Commission on Climate Change will

Adrian Jones

NASA/Wallops

section 10: implications for mitigation & adaptation • 79

Coastal development is vulnerable to sea-level rise and storm
surge.

80 • global warming and the free state: comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts in maryland
continue to evaluate adaptation strategies in addition
to sea-level rise and coastal vulnerability over the
next year or more. Although detailed evaluation of
adaptation options is beyond the scope of this report,
the assessments provided here should serve as a
useful basis for evaluation of adaptation strategies
appropriate for Maryland in the areas of human
health (heat and respiratory stress), water resources
(particularly emphasizing the Potomac Basin,
groundwater resources, and reducing the effects of
urbanization on flooding and stream health), forest
management (changing sequestration potential and
managing forest succession, diseases and pests), and
restoration of the Chesapeake Bay and Maryland’s
Coastal Bays (building on the recent analysis of the
Scientific and Technical Advisory Committee of the
Chesapeake Bay Program). These issues are ripe for
further evaluation by the Commission.

Monitoring, assessment, and forecasting

In general, there is insufficient monitoring of
Maryland’s climate, environmental conditions, and
resources to characterize their present state and
variability. Now that we realize that all of these are
changing and will be changing more rapidly in the
future, a better system of observations is required—
one that is reliably continuous, strategically targeted,
and thoroughly integrated. Reliable observations,
interpreted with scientific understanding, and
innovative models can dramatically reduce
uncertainty about the path of climate change in
Maryland and its consequences, allowing us to
make better informed and wise decisions about the
State’s future. It is clear that traditional approaches
to adaptation will not suffice in a future that no
longer resembles the past. Climate models can
be downscaled to incorporate locally important
phenomena, such as urban heat island and forest
cover effects, and resolve important differences
across our slice of the Mid-Atlantic landscape.
Maryland is in a strong position to become a
national and international leader in regional-toglobal climate change analysis and its application
to mitigation and adaptation. There is already
considerable, world-recognized expertise within
our public and private universities on which to
build. And, Maryland has the unmatched advantage
of the location of the Goddard Space Flight
Center, which leads the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration’s earth science program at
Greenbelt; headquarters of the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration’s line offices
at Silver Spring; and National Weather Service’s

Climate Prediction Center soon to be relocated
to College Park. Marshalling and enhancing this
capacity for continually improving climate impact
assessment would greatly benefit not only our State
of Maryland, but our planet, Earth.

