IPCC Special Report
“Global Warming of 1.5°C”
Summary for Teachers

Coordinator
Lydie Lescarmontier (France, OCE).
Authors (by alphabetical order)
Anwar Bhai Rumjaun (Mauritius Institute
of Education, Mauricius), Badin Borde
(Siemens Stiftung, Germany), Eric Guilyardi
(IPSL, France), Lydie Lescarmontier
(OCE, France), Robin Matthews (IPCC
Group 1, France), Christine Niewöhner
(Siemens Stiftung, Germany), Sakina Pen
Point (OCE, France), Jenny Schlüpmann
(Freie Universitat Berlin, Germany), David
Wilgenbus (OCE, France).
Acknowledgements
Technical Support Unit of IPCC Working
Group I for provision of background
information.
Date of Publication
December 2018.
Photos
John Salvino (cover)
Patrick Hendry (page 8)
Bill Wegener (page 11 & 23)
VanveenJF (page 13)
NASA (page 16)
Juha Lakaniemi (page 17)
John Westrock (page 19)
Art work
Mareva Sacoun (mareva.sacoun@gmail.com).

Summary
Introduction

5

Climate knowledge connected to the IPCC 1.5°C report

6

A. Understanding global warming

7

B. Climate change impacts at 1.5°C and 2°C

14

C. How to limit warming to 1.5°C ?

18

D.	Addressing climate change and sustainability simultaneously

20

Glossary

22

Resources

23

“Each degree matters, each year matters, and each
decision matters : not acting today is adding to the
burden of the next generations [...]. Limiting global
warming to 1.5°C is not impossible but requires strong
and immediate policies.”
Valérie Masson-Delmotte, Co-Chair of Working Group I of
the IPCC (8th of October 2018 – French Senate intervention)

4 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Introduction
What is the IPCC ?
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) is an international body for assessing the science related to climate change established in 1988
by the United Nations. It aims to provide policymakers
with regular assessments of the scientific understanding of climate change, including possible impacts and
options for adapting to them, and means of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.
These assessments present projections of future climate
change based on different scenarios of global emissions
(continued growth, rapid reduction, etc.) and the corresponding risks for human and natural systems. While
they lay out response options and
their implications, the reports do
not tell policymakers what actions
to take – they are “policy relevant
but not policy prescriptive.” IPCC
assessments are written by hundreds of leading scientists from
around the world and formally adopted by the governments of its 195 member countries. The IPCC
works by assessing already published literature rather
than conducting its own scientific research.

Why have report on 1.5°C ?
The Paris Agreement, a historic agreement reached in
Paris in December 2015, has been a game-changer
in international discussions on climate change. Nearly
all major greenhouse-gas emitting countries have now
ratified the Paris Agreement, together accounting for
around 90% of global emissions. Its aim is to keep
global warming well below 2°C and pursue “efforts to
limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C,” and deals with
emission reductions, adaptation to impacts, and means
to pay for these efforts. This temperature goal represents a significant strengthening of ambition from previous international discussions, which had focused on a
temperature goal of only below 2°C.
Given the lack of scientific knowledge around this ambitious new temperature goal at the time, the IPCC was
formally invited to produce a Special Report on Global
Warming of 1.5°C. Taking two
years to produce and written by
74 scientists from 40 countries,
the report was finalised and adopted by all IPCC member governments in Korea in October 2018.

Core concepts  : Global
Warming, Greenhouse gases,
Anthropogenic greenhouse
effects, IPCC working groups

IPCC main assessment reports come out about every
6 years, with more focused Special Reports released in
between. Three Special Reports will be published in the
current (sixth) IPCC assessment cycle :
—— Global warming of 1.5°C
—— Climate Change and Land
—— Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate

The following is a summary of the Special Report on
Global Warming of 1.5°C that is specifically intended
for teachers. It is presented together with a selection of
related activities and exercises that can be implemented in the classroom.

School activity
Question		 Why is this report called “1.5°C Report?”

The authors producing IPCC reports are organised into
three Working Groups :
—— Working Group I on past and possible future changes
in the climate system and carbon cycle (“The Physical Science Basis”)
—— Working Group II on past and future impacts, and
options for adapting to them (“Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability )
—— Working Group III on ways to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions (“Mitigation of Climate Change”)
Each report has a Summary for Policymakers (SPM).
5 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Climate knowledge connected to the IPCC 1.5°C report

6 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

A.

Understanding global warming

Greenhouse gases emissions past, present and future
Industrial revolution
In the 19th century, progress in science and technology
led to the Industrial Revolution. Starting in Great Britain, industrialisation spread first to Europe and then
worldwide. Alongside expansion in industry, transportation and agriculture, global population grew rapidly due
to progress in hygiene and medicine. Together, these
factors led to a rapid increase of
fossil fuel consumption, and
consequently, global greenhouse gas emissions.

A part of the energy
received from the sun
is sent back to space

The greenhouse effect – how are we changing our climate ?
The Sun’s rays travel through the atmosphere and warm
the Earth’s surface, generating the upward emission of
infrared heat. Some of this heat is trapped on its escape to space by greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
(mainly water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide and ozone) and sent back towards the surface.
Greenhouse gases thus act like a blanket, trapping your
body heat. As a consequence, the temperature of the
lower atmosphere is warmer than it otherwise would be.
In fact, without greenhouse gases, the average temperature of Earth’s surface would be about -18°C rather
than the present average of 15°C.

Energy coming from the sun
and crossing the atmosphere
reaches the surface

CO2

CH4

H20

INFRARED
HEAT

The Earth surface is warmed
up by the sun light and
emits infrared radiation partly
sent back to space

Greenhouse gases trap
a part of the infrared radiation

Functioning of the Greenhouse effect
Adapted from an original infographics by Lannis

7 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Greenhouse gases (GHGs) released by human activities
increase the thickness of this “atmospheric blanket”,
causing global temperatures to rise, i.e. global warming. To date, human-generated emissions since the
start of the Industrial Revolution (i.e. since “pre-industrial”) have led to global warming of 1.0°C.

If these emissions continue at current
rates, we are likely to reach 1.5°C of
warming between 2030 and 2052  –
an additional warming of 0.5°C
from today’s level.

Human-induced warming reached approximately 1°C above pre-industrial levels in 2017.
At the present rate, global temperature would reach 1.5°C around 2040.
Adapted from the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (IPCC)

School activity
Task		 What is climate and what is the difference with the weather ?
Look up the definition of climate on the WMO (World Meteorological Organization) website.
Keywords : 30 years, temperature, precipitation, atmosphere.
Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the average weather, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of the mean
and variability of relevant quantities over a period of time ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. Climate says which clothes
do we have to buy. Weather forecast says what do we have to wear.
The classical period for averaging these variables is 30 years, as defined by the World Meteorological Organization. The relevant quantities
are most often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical
description, of the climate system.
Question		 What is a greenhouse gas ?
Make a list of different greenhouse gases. Explain how they are produced. Compare their global warming potential.
Task		 Explain the greenhouse effect with a scheme and a short text.
Use the following words : emission, absorption, reflection, infrared light, atmosphere, Earth’s surface.
Reveal the difference between natural and anthropogenic greenhouse effect. (Anthropogenic means resulting from human activities.)
8 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

School activity
Task Compare the global warming potentials (GWP) of methane, nitrous oxide and hydrofluorocarbons with the GWP of CO2.
See, for example, table 8.7 in the IPCC report AR5, chapter 8, p. 712 :
http://www.climatechange2013.org/images/report/WG1AR5_Chapter08_FINAL.pdf
Task

Explain what is meant by global warming.

Question		 CO2 is emitted when burning fossil fuels. What are the “ other causes of global warming ” ? How can these other causes
be reduced ?
Keywords : biogas production, reforestation.
Task

Explain the connection between hydrofluorocarbons, the ozone layer and global warming.

Climate inertia
Even if we can somehow stop all carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions to the atmosphere immediately, global temperatures would stabilise but not decline – it takes centuries for millennia for the CO2 already present in the
atmosphere to be removed by natural processes. Sea
level would continue to rise during this time as the entire
ocean volume slowly expands in response to past surface
warming. In order to reduce global temperatures back
down to what they were back in pre-industrial times, we
would have to actively remove CO2 from the atmosphere.

The Paris Agreement
Under the Paris Agreement, 197 countries committed to
limiting global warming well below 2°C and, and aiming
to keep it 1.5°C. While limiting global warming to 1.5°C
is still possible – we not are already committed to this
by our past GHG emissions, we would have to act very
rapidly to achieve this goal.
It requires that our global CO2 emissions be reduced
to (effectively) zero over the next few decades, through
large, sustained emission reduction efforts across all
global regions and economic sectors.

School activity
Task Find the atmospheric lifetimes of different
greenhouse gases.
“ Atmospheric lifetime ”means the average time that something (a gas, for example) remains in the atmosphere.
Use this atmospheric lifetime of GHG data to explain why
global warming “ will persist for centuries to millennia.”

9 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Climate impacts and adapting to them
Global warming is causing changes in the climate system (physical climate impacts), which are already affecting humans, along with plants, animals and ecosystems. Physical impacts can occur simultaneously and
can interact with non-climatic factors like pollution.
Below we explain the different types of climate impacts,
and why some locations and populations are more at
risk than others. In many cases, we can act to reduce
impacts through an iterative process of planning and
implementing measures to combat them (adaptation).
As adaptation takes on a local to regional level, local
and indigenous knowledge can play a key role. Below
we introduce this concept, together with the notion of
uncertainty in how climate will change in the future.
Physical impacts
By global warming we mean the increase of the average surface temperature of the whole planet. However, some regions warm more than others. For example, warming has been greater in the Arctic than
the Antarctic and it is generally greater on land than
for the ocean. By the decade 2006 – 2015, 20 – 40% of
the global population had already experienced warming
of 1.5°C in at least one season.
Climate change manifests itself on two different timescales : through changes in the nature of single, shortlived extreme weather events, like hurricanes, and
through incremental changes that build up over decades, such as sea level rise. These can interact and
reinforce one another (e.g. extensive flooding due to a
storm surge on top of long-term sea level rise).
Changes in extreme weather with global
warming
We expect climate to cause extreme weather events –
like heat waves, heavy rainfall, floods and droughts – to
become more frequent and more severe. Under high
levels of warming, very intense hurricanes are expected
to occur more frequently, although the overall number of
hurricanes is expected to reduce.

School activity
Task Look at the following map (link below) showing
the increase in the number of combined tropical nights
(T min ≥ 20°C) and hot days (T max ≥ 35°C) in Europe.
How many more tropical nights/hot days will there approximately be in 2071-2100 as compared to 1961-1990
—— in Southern Portugal ?
—— in Northern Germany ?
—— in Norway ?
Source : European Environment Agency
https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/increase-in-the-number-of

Incremental changes with global warming
Intensification of the global water cycle with, in general,
dry areas becoming drier due to increased evaporation and wet areas becoming wetter.
Sea level rise is driven by melting of mountain glaciers
and ice sheets, and thermal expansion of the ocean.
As the ocean warms, its volume expands in a process
called the thermal expansion, and which occurs at all
ocean temperatures. Melting of ice on land (from mountain glaciers, and the Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets) and contributes the rest of current sea level rise.
Water from melted continental ice drains into the ocean
and therefore contributes to sea level rise.
There has been a steady decline in sea ice in the Arctic since 1979. Sea ice, floating on the ocean, does not
contribute to sea level rise.
In addition to the warming it causes, the steady accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere is also having direct
impacts. This CO2 dissolves into the ocean and reacts
with the water to form carbonic acid, raising the ocean’s
acidity in a process called ocean acidification.
School activity
Task

Look up : What is causing sea level rise ?

10 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Impacts and adaptation for human systems
Global warming can negatively affect a wide range
of human activities and needs, and is already doing
so. More frequent extreme weather events can impact
crop production, while higher temperatures favour the
propagation of infectious diseases into new areas.
Freshwater supply can be impacted by glacier melt and
changing rainfall patterns. Sea level rise has a wide variety of impacts including coastal erosion, and infiltration
of salt water into groundwater or estuaries, affecting arable land and freshwater supplies.
We should remember, however, that while on the whole,
climate impacts tend to be detrimental to human activities and ecosystems, there can be beneficial outcomes
in some cases, such as longer growing seasons. We
should also bear in mind that these changes do not
occur in isolation, but can interact with other unrelated
factors, for the better or worse. For instance, overconsumption of water in a location exposed to drought can
make a population more vulnerable when droughts occur.
How much a physical change in climate affects a particular place not only depends how big the physical
change is, but also on how exposed the location is to
that change and on how vulnerable (or susceptible) its
population and infrastructure are to being affected. For
sea level rise, the most exposed populations are those
living in low-lying coastal areas and low-lying islands,
while those most vulnerable tend to be the poor and disadvantaged, including in the developing island nations
in the Pacific. For droughts, those directly dependent
on agriculture for their livelihoods and food supply are
among the most vulnerable since they are highly susceptible to changes in temperature and rainfall.

erage thicknesses of 2.5 km for Antarctica and 2 km for
Greenland). However, estimates vary as to what the timing and size of these contributions will be. Current estimates range between 25 centimetres to over a meter
by 2100, depending in part on how much we emit in
the future. Uncertainty in forecasts of future climate also
derives from different estimates for the amount of global
warming that will result from a given increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere – i.e. just how sensitive
the climate system is to our emissions.
An additional difficulty for planning ways to adapt to climate change, such as building coastal protections, is that
these options come with their own risks. Finally, the resulting greenhouse gas emissions need to be considered
when implementing adaptation measures to avoid competing goals, such as adaptation efforts leading to increased emissions. The implications for sustainable
development, including around food, water and human
security also need to be taken into account (see Section
D).
School activity
Task Think of some adaptation and mitigation measures for your home, your town/village, your country.
You may look for ideas on the European Climate Adaptation
Platform :  https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/knowledge/
adaptation-information/adaptation-measures

How exposed and vulnerable a place and its people
are can change over time. In fact, efforts to adapt to
climate change aim to reduce vulnerability and exposure to particular climate impacts. Vulnerability can be
reduced through economic development and diversification, while exposure can be reduced by moving people
and infrastructure out of harm’s way (e.g. to higher
ground in the case of sea level rise).
A key difficulty in efforts to adapt to climate change is
that future changes in climate are often uncertain. Take
sea level rise, for example. The largest potential future
contributors are the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets,
representing the largest amount of continental ice (av11 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Ocean acidification is another well-known example of
how climate change can impact biodiversity. Increasing acidity has a wide range of potentially harmful consequences for marine organisms, shown to impact the
immune systems of shellfish and formation of the
skeletons of corals and specific plankton.

Impacts for ecosystems and biological adaptation
The increase in temperature is and will continue to
impact on biodiversity and ecosystems. Warming
affects the habitats of plants and animals, which can
either migrate, adapt, or perish. Species are migrating
towards cooler environments - poleward or to greater
depths in the ocean, and poleward or uphill on land,
but may not be able to move readily (e.g. due to habitat
fragmentation) or fast enough.

The effect of warming on biodiversity will depend on the
temperature eventually reached and at which rate it will
be reached. The higher the temperature and the faster it
changes, the greater the impacts. A high rate of global
warming reduces the chances that species can adapt, as they do not have enough time for adaptation.

Biological adaptation includes changes in the timing of
seasonal activities (e.g. flowering of plants) and through
evolution. In combination, these changes can alter the
structure of ecosystems, affecting the services they
provide to humans (e.g. coastal protection in the case
of coral reefs).

The next section explores how large the risks from climate change are at and above 1.5°C of warming.

EUROPE
NORTH AMERICA
ASIA

AFRICA
SMALL ISLANDS
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA

AUSTRALASIA

POLAR REGIONS
(Arctic and Antarctic)

Observed impacts attributed to climate change for
Physical systems

Biological systems

Human and managed systems

Glaciers, snow, ice and/or permafrost

Terrestrial ecosystems

Food production

Rivers, lakes, floods and/or drought

Wildfire

Livelihoods, health and/or economics

Coastal erosion and/or sea level effects

Marine ecosystems

Widespread impacts attributed to climate change based on the available scientific literature.
Adapted from the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (IPCC).

12 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

To sum up
Human activities have caused a rise in global temperatures of 1.0°C over the past 150 years.
Global warming is likely to reach 1.5°C between 2030
and 2052, if warming continues at the current rate.
Our CO2 emissions will remain in the atmosphere for
centuries to millennia, maintaining the warmer temperatures long after these emissions cease.
Climate change manifests itself on two different
time-scales affecting both short-term extreme weather events, as well as causing gradual, long-term
changes, including sea level rise, melting of glaciers
and ice sheets, and changes in biodiversity.
The level of impact from climate change for a
community depends not only on the rate and size
of the physical changes in climate, but also on how
exposed their location is and how vulnerable to the
change they are. Adaptation is made more difficult
because we can’t predict exactly how the climate
will change in a given place in future.

School activity
Task		 It is stated that the global temperature has already increased by approximately 1.0°C. It says further that global warming is likely
to reach 1.5°C between 2030 and 2052 if it continues to increase at the current rate.
Find out the current warming rate.
Hints to solve this task :
1. Take concrete numbers : for today take 2017 – For “between 2030 and 2052” take 2036.
2. Divide the task into different steps : Until 2017, the increase of the global mean temperature was 1.0°C.
• There is only 0.5°C missing to reach a global warming of 1.5°C
• An increase of 0.5°C between 2017 and 2036 corresponds to a warming rate of : 0.5°C / (2036 – 2017) = 0.026°C per year (or
0.26°C per decade)
Solution : the current rate of warming is approximately 0.026°C per year.
Task		 Look at the map of countries of the European Union showing the potential vulnerability to climate change :
https://www.espon.eu/sites/default/files/attachments/Vulnerability_ESPONclimate.pdf
(Linking page : https://www.espon.eu/climate-2012)
Which regions are particularly vulnerable to climate change ?
Support your answer with clear justifications/arguments.
13 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Climate change impacts at 1.5°C
and 2°C

B.

The amount of global warming depends both on past
emissions of greenhouse gases and on those we will
emit in the coming years. In general, the more warming,
the greater the risks and impacts will be.
A global warming of 2°C would have significantly
larger impacts than a global warming of 1.5°C (1°C
above today as opposed to 0.5°C). Specific examples
from the Special Report on 1.5°C are given below by the
type of impact.
Impacts at 1.5°C vs. higher warming levels
Extreme events

Hot extremes at the local scale can increase faster than
the average warming of the whole planet. For instance,
for a 0.5°C rise in global temperature, the corresponding increase in the highest temperatures reached during
heatwaves can be up to two to three times more (for
example, increasing from 30°C to 31.5°C). Three times
more people (420 million people) would be exposed to
severe heat waves at least once every 5 years and the
most impacted regions would be the Mediterranean and
Sub-Saharan Africa.
This would have implications for human health, particularly in cities, which tend to be artificially warmer than
their surroundings due to a “heat island” effect created
by the buildings and roads. There is also higher risk of
droughts at 1.5°C than at 2°C in the Mediterranean and
Southern Africa, while globally 200-300 million more
people would be exposed to water shortages at 2°C
than at 1.5°C. Heavy rainfall events are expected to occur more often at high latitudes in the northern hemisphere at 2°C compared to 1.5°C.

Sea level rise

Sea level rise by 2100 will be 10 cm higher if global
warming reaches 2.0°C instead of 1.5°C. It would lead
to the relocation of up to 10.4 million people [Special
Report 1.5°C, Chapter 3, p8]. Exceeding 1.5°C increases
the risk of triggering instabilities in polar ice sheets that
would lead multi-meter sea level rise over centuries to
millennia. As explained in Section B, even if we stop
emitting greenhouse gases immediately sea levels will
keep rising over these time-scales due to ocean inertia.
Sea ice

The Arctic would be effectively free of sea ice in summer
a few times each decade with a 2°C warming, but only
one or a few times a century under 1.5°C warming.
School activity
Task Why is the decline of Arctic sea ice extent threatening the livelihood of polar bears ?

Species, ecosystems and food production

On land, the area of risk from major ecosystem change
is expected to be around 50% lower at 1.5°C than at
2°C. In addition, risks of species local losses and extinction are also much lower at 1.5°C.
For coral reefs, while the prognosis is dire at 1.5°C, it is
worse still at 2°C. Around 70 to 90% of coral reefs are
expected to be lost at 1.5°C compared to 99% at 2°C
of warming. Today, 30% of the corals are already damaged by the ocean temperature rise and its acidification.

14 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Heat waves intensity

At +1.5°C : Heat waves would be higher of 3°C
At +2°C : Heat waves would be higher of 4°C

Decline in the global fisheries catch could be twice as
large at 2°C than 1.5°C, and there would be smaller reductions in yields of key food crops of maize, rice and
wheat at 1.5°C than at 2°C.
Ocean acidification

Heavy rains

Higher risk at 2°C than 1.5°C in high
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere,
Eastern Asia and North America

Since the level of CO2 in the atmosphere would be lower
at 1.5 than at 2°C, less CO2 would be taken up by the
ocean, and thus the increase in ocean acidity would be
less at 1.5°C.
School activity

Biodiversity loss

Lost of half of the natural habitat for :
— 4% of vertebrates at +1.5°C
against 8% at 2°C
— 6% of insects at +1.5°C
against 18% at +2°C
— 8% of plants at +1.5°C
against 16% at +2°C

Cereal crops

Yield decrease
More important at +2°C,
Specially in Africa
Subsaharian, South-East
Asia and Latine America

Coral

Coral reef damages :
— up to 70 - 90% at +1.5°C
— up to 99% at +2°C

Sea level rise

At +1.5°C
From 26 cm up to 77cm from now until 2100
At +2°C
10 cm higher
Plus 10 millions people relocated

Fisheries

Annual fish catch reduced of :
— 1.5 millions of tonnes at +1.5°C
— more than 3 millions of tonnes at +2°C

Experiment

Plan an experiment to show that CO2

emissions increase ocean acidity.
See, for example, the teaching unit “CO2 emissions and acidification of the oceans”, taken out of La main à la pâte’s
teaching module “The ocean, my planet and me !”.
Question What are the causes and consequences of
coral bleaching ?

Adaptation at 1.5°C vs. 2°C
In combination, the greater physical changes at warming of 2°C as opposed to 1.5°C, lead to larger risks for
livelihoods, food and water security, human health
and security, and economic growth.
As the impacts would be larger at 2°C than 1.5°C,
greater adaptation efforts would be required to deal
with them.
However, even at 1.5°C, the speed and rate of the physical changes can exceed human abilities to adapt. For
instance, in the case of sea level rise, the populations of
some low-lying islands may ultimately have to permanently relocate.

Arctic sea ice

Free of ice :
— once or few times per century at +1.5°C
— few times each decade at +2°C

Impact of a global warming at +1.5°C or +2°C
Adapted from an infographics by Le Monde

15 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

POLAR REGIONS (ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC)

Risks for health
and well-being

Risks for ecosystems

NORTH AMERICA

Increased damages
from wildfires

Increased damages
from river and coastal
urban floods

Heat-related
human mortality

Unprecedented challenges,
especially from rate of change

Increased damages from
river and coastal floods

ASIA

EUROPE

Increased damages
from extreme heat
Increased water restrictions events and wildfires

Increased flood damage
to infrastructure,
Heat-related
livelihoods
human mortality
and settlements

Increased
drought-related
water and food
shortage

THE OCEAN
AFRICA

Distributional
shift and reduced
fisheries catch
potential at low latitudes

Increased mass coral
bleaching and mortality

Coastal inundation
and habitat loss

Compounded stress
on water resources

CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA

Reduced water availability and
increased flooding and landslides

AUSTRALASIA

SMALL ISLANDS

Loss of livelihoods,
settlements, infrastructure, ecosystem
services and
economic stability

Reduced crop productivity and
livelihood and food security

Reduced food production and quality

Vector- and waterborne
diseases

Spread of vector-borne diseases

Risks for low-lying
coastal areas

Significant change in composition
and structure of coral reef syste

Increased risks to
Increased flood damage coastal infrastructure
to infrastructure and
and low-lying
settlements
ecosystems

not assessed

Representative key risks for each region for
Glaciers,
snow, ice
and/or
permafrost

Physical systems
Rivers, lakes,
floods and/or
drought

Risk level

Biological systems
Coastal erosion
and/or sea level
effects

Terrestrial
ecosystems

Wildfire

Marine
ecosystems

Human and managed systems
Livelihoods,
Food
health and/or
production
economics

Very low

Medium

Very high

1.5°C
2°C

Regional key risks and potential for risk reduction with current adaptation.
Adapted from the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (IPCC).

School activity
Task Name some impacts of global warming on
coastal ecosystems.
Keywords : flooding, erosion, etc.
Task Name some ecosystem services to humans.
Keywords : pollination of crops, provision of clean water,
provision of food, carbon sinks, leisure and tourism, etc.

16 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

To sum up
A global warming of 1.5°C is not “safe” - the physical
risks and impacts will be large. However, the risks
will be substantially lower than at warming of 2°C.
Adaptation is still required at 1.5°C, although efforts
required will be smaller than at 2°C. There will be limits to what can be achieved through adaptation at
both 1.5°C and 2°C, in which the physical changes
in climate overwhelm our abilities to deal with them.
The physical changes and impacts will vary by location.
Compared to 2°C, at 1.5°C global warming :
—— Heat waves would be less frequent and with lower peak temperatures.
—— Sea levels would be 10 cm lower. As a
consequence, low-lying coasts and islands
would have greater opportunities to adapt.
—— The Arctic would effectively become sea ice free
in summer in the Arctic at 2°C, but would still
have sea ice year-round at 1.5°C.
—— The impacts on biodiversity (including biodiversity loss) for land, freshwater and coastal ecosystems would be lower. We would retain more of
nature’s services for humans (pollination, clean
water etc.).
—— The ocean would be less acidified, lowering the
consequent risks for marine biodiversity and
ecosystems – including the services they provide
to humans, such as fisheries.

17 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

C.

How to limit warming to 1.5°C ?

The more CO2 and other greenhouse gases we release
into the atmosphere, the more global temperatures will
rise. Unfortunately, the slow removal of CO2 from the
atmosphere means that global temperatures will remain
warmer for centuries to millennia even after we completely stop emitting CO2. As
such, the goal of international climate agreements to date has not
to reduce global temperatures
2
back to where they were before
humans started warming the planet, but merely to limit
the amount of warming induced by stabilising global
temperature at a certain (albeit raised) level.

implemented on a large scale, a key concern is that it
would create competition with using land to grow crops
for food instead of for fuel. We also don’t know how
well the method works at large scale. Greater emission
reductions would be required to avoid use of carbon
dioxide removal methods.

To stabilise global temperature,
we need to effectively stop
emitting CO to the atmosphere.

In order to stabilise global temperature, we need to effectively stop emitting CO2 to the atmosphere. There are
two ways we can achieve this : We can actually reduce
our emissions to zero ; Or we can effectively do so by
substantially reducing them and then offsetting remaining
emissions by using technology and/or biological means
to remove CO2 from the atmosphere – with the net effect
being as though we were not CO2 emitting at all.
Carbon dioxide removal
Biological means for removing CO2 from the atmosphere include planting trees and restoring ecosystems.
Technological means include direct capture from the
air using chemicals, converting the CO2 to a liquid and
storing it underground, although this technique is still in
development. Another method involves growing plants
and trees to burn as fuel for power plants and capturing and storing the CO2 that is produced underground.
Since this CO2 originally came from the atmosphere (extracted by the plants and trees as they grew), the net
result is a removal of CO2 from the atmosphere. Given
that this method, known as BECCS, would need to be

The goal of the Paris Agreement
is to limit warming to well below
2°C (1°C warmer than today) and
to attempt to restrict warming to 1.5°C (0.5°C warmer
than today). We are not on track to limit warming to
1.5°C, in fact, current emission reduction pledges made
by nations in the Paris Agreement would lead to warming of 3-4°C by the end of this century.
Fortunately, the Paris Agreement has a mechanism that
allows contribution to raise their level of ambition for
emission reductions over time.

Overshoot
There are two types of paths that global temperature
can follow over the coming decades to limit warming
to a certain amount (e.g. 1.5°C) : ones in which global
temperature increases by that amount and then stabilises, and ones in which global temperature temporarily exceeds, or overshoots, that warming level before
subsequently returning to and stabilising there. For
overshoot paths, removal of CO2 from the atmosphere
would be required to bring global temperature back
down to after overshooting the target level.
The impacts of overshooting and then stabilising at
1.5°C will be more different to those of reaching 1.5°C
without overshoot, due to the different rates of change
and the different maximum warming level reached. The
longer and larger the overshoot, the greater the risks.

18 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Emissions paths to 1.5°C
Given that we would need to effectively reduce CO2
emissions to zero in order to limit warming to a given
level – the question becomes one of how rapidly we
would need to this. To limit warming to 1.5°C, CO2 emissions would have decrease by 45% by 2030 from their
2010 levels, and effectively reach zero in 2050. In comparison, limiting global warming to 2°C would require
CO2 emissions to decline by 20% by 2030 before effectively ceasing by around 2075. In both cases, a substantial global effort to reduce emissions is needed in the
next few decades and without delay. If we delay action
now, more rapid emissions reduction will be needed in
the future to limit warming to the same level, and these
emissions reduction will be more costly.
What would we need to do ?
Firstly, we need to reduce global energy, materials
and food demand. This could be assisted by changes
in behaviour and lifestyles, including around food consumption (reducing meat and dairy consumption, and
reducing in food waste), and transport choices (e.g. flying less). In addition, better insulation of buildings would
help reduce heating needs – buildings being responsible
for around a third of global energy consumption.
Second, we would need to use energy and materials
more efficiently. For instance, switching to energy efficient appliances or more efficient processes in industry.
In the construction sector, use of low-emission building
materials, such as wood, could help reduce emissions.
Third, we need to improve agricultural practices so
as to reduce emissions and water use, including improving soil management and altering cattle diets. We
also need to reduce deforestation which together with
other changes in land use, account for 12% or CO2
emissions.
Finally, we need to transform the make-up of global
energy supply. A large scale up of renewable energy
production is required, with renewables (including biomass, wind, hydropower and solar) to supply half to
two-thirds of primary energy in 2050 to achieve the
1.5°C target. We also need to transition transport away
from fossil fuels to running on low-emission electricity.
Switching to electric vehicles would bring other benefits
besides reducing climate impacts, including improving
air quality in cities. It’s estimated that the additional
emission reduction actions to limit warming to 1.5°C

compared to 2°C would reduce premature deaths from
air pollution by 100-200 million over the course of this
century.
Together these efforts amount to major transitions in all
aspects of society of unprecedented scale. What happens in the next ten years will be critical. Given the inertia of the global economic system, it will be very difficult
to achieve the emission reductions at scale and rates
required, without using methods of removing CO2 from
the atmosphere. Major investments will be needed to
realise these transitions, including in developing countries. These could be complemented by government
legalisation such energy standards or a price on carbon.

To sum up
To stabilise global warming at 1.5°C, we need to
reduce our CO2 emissions to be effectively zero
in the next 30 years. This would involve large
and rapid emission reductions worldwide and
throughout society, including changes in behaviour and lifestyles. In addition, use of methods
to remove CO2 from the atmosphere may end
up being required. The more action on emissions reductions made now, the less will be the
need to employ these risky measures.
Transitions will be needed in the way to produce
and consume energy, materials and food, in our
use of land (including agriculture), in our transportation system and in industry. These system
transitions will be unprecedented in scale and
will require large investments.
We are not on track to limit warming to 1.5°C,
and are currently heading for 3-4°C warming by
2100. The good news is there is movement in
the right direction in lots of these areas but we
would need to do more, faster.

19 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Addressing climate change and
sustainability simultaneously

D.

Even without factoring in climate change, we face tremendous global challenges over the coming decades.
The number of people living in poverty today is estimated to be 1.5 billion. At the same time, global population is growing rapidly, predicted to rise from 7.6 billion
today to 8.5-10 billion by 2050, and urbanising, with
urban-dwellers predicted to rise by 2 billion people in
the next three decades.
The United Nations has developed a set of 17 Sustainable development goals (SDGs 1) and corresponding
targets to address, major global challenges including
poverty, hunger, health, education, inequality, food and

water security, energy access, economic development,
peace and justice, climate change and biodiversity. In
order to achieve these goals (including tackling climate
change), we need to break the long-standing relationships between population and economic growth with
greenhouse gas emissions. Namely, since the industrial revolution, economic and population growth have
gone hand-in-hand with higher greenhouse gas emissions. And we need to overcome this while the physical
impacts of climate change act to exacerbate poverty.
Climate change and sustainable development are thus
intricately coupled and need to be considered together.

The 17 Sustainable development Goals set by the United Nations in 2015
United Nations – Sustainable Development Goals
1 https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/
20 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

In general, the countries that have contributed least to
the problem in terms of their total carbon emissions,
face some of the greatest risks.
Likewise, sustainable development supports, and often enables, the fundamental
societal and systems evolutions that help
limit global warming to 1.5°C.

One main new conclusion of the 1.5°C report is that
efforts to eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities
go together with efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change.
International cooperation can provide an enabling environment for this to be achieved in all countries and for
all people in the context of sustainable development, especially in developing countries and vulnerable regions.

To sum up
With clear benefits to people and natural ecosystems, limiting global warming to 1.5°C compared to 2°C could go hand in hand with ensuring a more sustainable and equitable society.
Systems transition requires :
—— More investments in adaptation and mitigation,
—— Behavior changes,
—— Acceleration of technological innovation.
Sustainable development supports fundamental
societal and systems transition and transformation. The international cooperation is essential.

School activity
Task

How much is 52–58 Gt CO2 eq yr –1 ?

Check the World Bank page on greenhouse gas emissions : https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.ATM.GHGT.KT.CE
—— What is the total amount of the World’s GHG emissions (in CO2 eq) ? (Answer : 53,5 Gt CO2 eq)
—— What is the total amount of your country’s GHG emissions (in CO2 eq) ? (France : 0,5 Gt CO2 eq)
—— What are the GHG emissions per capita for your country (in CO2 eq per capita) ? (France : 0,5 Gt CO2 eq divided 65 million inhabitants
= 7.7 t CO2 eq per capita)
Task		 Look up your countries NDC’s and estimate whether they will be fulfilled or whether the goals will be missed.
Question		 What is low GHG-intensive food consumption ?
Task		 Explain why/how afforestation and bioenergy supply can compete with food production ?
Examples for crops for bioenergy : maize, palm oil.
Task		 Find reasons why the Sustainable Development Goals 1 (no poverty) and 10 (reduced inequalities) are so important for limiting
global warming to 1.5°C.
21 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Glossary
Adaptation
The process of adjustment to actual or expected climate
and its effects. In human systems, adaptation seeks to
moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. In
natural systems, human intervention may facilitate adjustment to expected climate and its effects.
Anthropogenic emissions
Greenhouse gases emissions caused by human activities.
Biodiversity
Biodiversity is the level of diversity of living organisms in
an area, for instance, the diversity of species within an
ecosystem, or the diversity within one species.
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR)
Anthropogenic activities removing CO2 from the atmosphere and durably storing it in geological, terrestrial, or
ocean reservoirs, or in products. It includes existing and
potential anthropogenic enhancement of biological or
geochemical sinks and direct air capture and storage,
but excludes natural CO2 uptake not directly caused by
human activities.
Emission pathways
In the Summary for Policymakers, the modelled trajectories of global anthropogenic emissions over the 21st
century are termed emission pathways. Emission pathways are classified by their temperature trajectory over
the 21st century : pathways giving at least 50% probability based on current knowledge of limiting global warming to below 1.5°C are classified as “no overshoot” ;
those limiting warming to below 1.6°C and returning
to 1.5°C by 2100 are classified as “1.5°C limited-overshoot” ; while those exceeding 1.6°C but still returning
to 1.5°C by 2100 are classified as “higher-overshoot.”
Greenhouse gases and infrared light
Greenhouse gases absorb reflected solar energy, making the Earth’s atmosphere warmer. A lot of the sun’s
energy reaches the ground directly, and a portion is reflected by the ground back into the atmosphere. Some
gases, when present in the atmosphere, absorb that
reflected energy (called infrared light) and redirect it
back to Earth as heat. The gases responsible for this
are called greenhouse gases.

Net zero emissions
Net-zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions are achieved
when anthropogenic CO2 emissions are balanced globally by anthropogenic CO2 removals over a specified
period.
Global Mean Surface Temperature (GMST)
Estimated global average of near-surface air temperatures over land and sea-ice, and sea surface temperatures over ice-free ocean regions, with changes normally
expressed as departures from a value over a specified
reference period. When estimating changes in GMST,
near-surface air temperature over both land and oceans
are also used.
Global Warming
The estimated increase in GMST averaged over a 30year period, or the 30-year period centered on a particular year or decade, expressed relative to pre-industrial
levels unless otherwise specified. For 30-year periods that span past and future years, the current multi-decadal warming trend is assumed to continue.
Mitigation
A human intervention to reduce the sources or enhance
the sinks of greenhouse gases.
Pre-industrial
The multi-century period prior to the onset of large-scale
industrial activity around 1750. The reference period
1850–1900 is used to approximate pre-industrial GMST.
Sustainable development goals
The sustainable development goals are the blueprint to
achieve a better and more sustainable future for all. They
address the global challenges we face, including those
related to poverty, inequality, climate, environmental degradation, prosperity and peace and justice. Examples :
No poverty, zero hunger, quality education, etc...
Temperature overshoot
The temporary exceedance of a specified level of global
warming.

22 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

Resources
Conceptual Scenario from the OCE.
Resources for trainers (Climate and Greenhouse effect – Ocean & Climate) from the OCE.
Other resources selected
https://climatekids.nasa.gov
http://www.fondation-lamap.org/en/20322/the-ocean-my-planet-and-me
https://medienportal.siemens-stiftung.org/portal/main.php?todo=showObjData&objid=104534
https://tropicsu.org/un-resources/
https://tropicsu.org/resources/pedagogical-tools-examples/
https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/knowledge/adaptation-information/adaptation-measures
http://theconversation.com/what-is-a-pre-industrial-climate-and-why-does-it-matter-78601
https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate1072
https://ocean-climate.org/?lang=en
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002607/260721E.pdf
About the IPCC
Video of the IPCC Working Group I : “Climate Change 2013 : The Physical Science Basis”
https://www.youtube.com/watch ?v=6yiTZm0y1YA&feature=youtu.be/
This video is also available in other languages : http://www.climatechange2013.org/
https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1049626179508953088.html

23 | Office for Climate Education IPCC Special Report “Global Warming of 1.5°C” — Summary for Teachers

“ Parties should take measures [...]
to enhance climate education ”,
states Art.12 of the Paris Agreement.
“ Educating the present and future
generations about climate change,
and teaching them to act with a
critical mind and a hopeful heart, is
essential for the future of humanity. Science education must meet
the challenge [...] ”, recommend
the 113 science Academies of the
world in their recent Statement on
Climate Change and Education.
Replying to these urgent calls, climate scientists and educators are
establishing an Office for Climate
Education. Teachers are key for
implementing these recommendations, especially in primary and secondary schools. Hence, the Office
shall produce for them educational

resources, based on an active pedagogy and amplifying pilot projects
in Inquiry-based science education. As IPCC produces “Assessment reports” and “Summaries for
policy-makers”, the Office shall in
the coming years synchronously
produce “Resources and tools for
teachers”, focusing on the issues
of adaptation and attenuation. It will
pay special attention to developing
countries.
Working closely with climate scientists, involving social scientists and
educators, the Office for Climate
Education has an executive secretariat in Paris and a global network
of local or regional partners in over
60 countries already. The teaching resources will be conceived
in a global frame, then be locally

tested and adapted to particular
situations. The numerous initiatives
already taken in the same direction
will be documented and publicised
by the Office.
The Office for Climate Education
begins in 2018 with the support of
public and private funds provided
by French and German partners. It
will amplify its action in proportion
with its resources and develop partnerships, especially with IPCC and
IAP for Science – the global federation of Science Academies.
http://oce.global
contact@oce.global
Fondation La main à la pâte
43 rue de Rennes
75006 Paris – France


